विदया या विम
GENERAL
SCIENCE
१९६७
V२०१७
बालभारती
सुवर्णमहोत्सव
STANDARD SIX
समज
VIA
Sanction no. : MSCERT/avivi/sp/2015-16/1673 Date : 06/04/2016
GENERAL SCIENCE
STANDARD SIX
0
Maharashtra State Bureau of Textbook Production and
Curriculum Research, Pune.
The QR Code given alongside and on other pages in this
book can be scanned with a smartphone, which leads to
link/s (URL) useful for the teaching/learning of this textbook.
First Edition : 2016 © Maharashtra State Bureau of Textbook Production and
First Reprint : 2017 © Curriculum Research, Pune - 411 004.
The Maharashtra State Bureau of Textbook Production and Curriculum
Research reserves all rights relating to the book. No part of this book
should be reproduced without the written permission of the Director,
Maharashtra State Bureau of Textbook Production and Curriculum
Research, ‘Balbharati’, Senapati Bapat Marg, Pune 411004.
Coordination :
Rajiv Arun Patole
Special Officer for Science
Science Subject Committee :
Dr Chandrashekhar Murumkar, Chairman
Dr Dilip Sadashiv Jog, Member
Dr Abhay Jere, Member
Dr Sulabha Nitin Vidhate, Member
Smt. Mrinalini Desai, Member
Shri. Gajanan Suryawanshi, Member
Shri. Sudhir Yadavrao Kamble, Member
Smt. Dipali Dhananjay Bhale, Member
Shri. Rajiv Arun Patole, Member-Secretary
Translation :
Dr Sushma Jog
Smt. Manisha Dahivelkar
Scrutiny :
Smt. Mrinalini Desai
Coordination :
Dhanavanti Hardikar
Academic Secretary for Languages
Santosh Pawar
Subject Assistant, English
Science Study Group :
Dr Prabhakar Nagnath Kshirsagar
Dr Shaikh Mohammed Waquioddin H.
Dr Vishnu Vaze
Dr Ajay Digambar Mahajan
Dr Gayatri Gorakhnath Choukade
Shri. Prashant Panditrao Kolse
Smt. Kanchan Rajendra Sorate
Shri. Shankar Bhikan Rajput
Smt. Manisha Rajendra Dahivelkar
Shri. Dayashankar Vishnu Vaidya
Smt. Shweta Thakur
Shri. Sukumar Navale
Shri. Hemant Achyut Lagvankar
Shri. Nagesh Bhimsevak Telgote
Shri. Manoj Rahangdale
Shri. Mohammed Atique Abdul Shaikh
Smt. Jyoti Medpilwar
Smt. Dipti Chandansingh Bisht
Smt. Pushpalata Gawande
Smt. Anjali Khadke
Shri. Rajesh Vamanrao Roman
Shri. Vishwas Bhave
| Smt. Jyoti Damodar Karane
Typesetting :
DTP Section, Textbook Bureau, Pune
Paper :
70 GSM Creamwove
Print Order :
Printer :
Production :
Sachchitanand Aphale
Chief Production Officer
Rajendra Vispute
Production Officer
Cover and illustrations :
Smt. Janhavi Damle-Jedhe
Shri. Suresh Gopichand Isave
Ms. Ashana Advani
Shri. Manoj Kamble
Publisher :
Vivek Uttam Gosavi
Controller
Maharashtra State Textbook Bureau,
Prabhadevi, Mumbai - 400 025.
Woo Osno
The Constitution of India
Preamble
WE, THE PEOPLE OF INDIA, having
solemnly resolved to constitute India into a
SOVEREIGN SOCIALIST SECULAR
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC and to secure to
all its citizens:
JUSTICE, social, economic and political;
LIBERTY of thought, expression, belief, faith
and worship;
EQUALITY of status and of opportunity;
and to promote among them all
FRATERNITY assuring the dignity of
the individual and the unity and integrity of the
Nation;
IN OUR CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY this
twenty-sixth day of November, 1949, do HEREBY
ADOPT, ENACT AND GIVE TO OURSELVES
THIS CONSTITUTION.
CON
NATIONAL ANTHEM
Jana-gana-mana-adhināyaka jaya hē
Bhārata-bhāgya-vidhātā,
Panjāba-Sindhu-Gujarāta-Marāthā
Drāvida-Utkala-Banga
Vindhya-Himāchala-Yamunā-Gangā
uchchala-jaladhi-taranga
Tava subha nāmē jāgē, tava subha āsisa māgē,
gāhē tava jaya-gāthā,
Jana-gana-mangala-dāyaka jaya hē
Bhārata-bhāgya-vidhātā,
Jaya hē, Jaya hē, Jaya hē,
Jaya jaya jaya, jaya hē.
PLEDGE
India is my country. All Indians
are my brothers and sisters.
I love my country, and I am proud
of its rich and varied heritage. I shall
always strive to be worthy of it.
I shall give my parents, teachers
and all elders respect, and treat
everyone with courtesy.
To my country and my people,
I pledge my devotion. In their
well-being and prosperity alone lies
my happiness.
Preface
The ‘Primary Education Curriculum - 2012” was prepared in the State of
Maharashtra following the ‘Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education
Act, 2009' and the ‘National Curriculum Framework - 2005’. This syllabus approved
by the State Government is being implemented serially from the academic year
2013-2014. In the syllabus as well as in the textbooks for Std III to V, General Science is
included in ‘Environmental Studies'. However, Std VI onwards, it is included separately.
Accordingly, the Textbook Bureau has prepared this textbook of General Science for
Std VI. We are happy to place it in your hands.
Our approach while designing this textbook was that the entire teaching-learning
process should be child-centred, the emphasis should be on self-learning and the
process of education should become enjoyable and interesting. During the teaching-
learning process, there should be clarity about the specific competencies that children
are expected to achieve at the various stages of primary education. That is why, the
expected competencies regarding General Science have been given in the textbook. In
keeping with these competencies, the content included in the textbook has been presented
in an innovative way. The content, activities and projects have been given under specific
headings in each chapter to get the children to observe things carefully, to learn by
actually doing something, to compile information, to classify this information or data, to
draw conclusions from it, and so on. The supplementary information given in the textbook
will help to make children's learning more effective. At several places, projects have
been given to help make teaching as activity-oriented as possible. The main objective
of this textbook is to inculcate a scientific attitude among the children. Along with
science, an introduction to the use of technology in the surroundings and an emphasis on
environmental and social awareness are the important features of this textbook.
This book was scrutinized by teachers, educationists, and experts from all parts of
the State, to make it as flawless and useful as possible. Their comments and suggestions
have been duly considered by the Science Subject Committee while finalizing the book.
The Science Subject Committee and the Study Group of the Textbook Bureau and the
artists have taken great pains to prepare this book. The Bureau is thankful to all of them.
We hope that this book will receive a warm welcome from students, teachers and
parents.
Pune
Date : 9 May 2016,
Akshay Tritiya,
Indian Solar Year :
Vaishakh 19, 1938
(Dr Sunil Magar)
Director
Maharashtra State Bureau of
Textbook Production and
Curriculum Research, Pune.
For Teachers
We learn many new facts while studying science. So, young children with a lot of
curiosity find the subject enjoyable. However, the real objective of learning science
is to learn to think about the world and all the events that take place in it, in an
objective and rational manner so as to lead a happy confident life. Through the
study of science we also expect children to develop social consciousness, awareness
about conservation of the environment and adeptness in handling technology.
We need to have adequate factual information and understanding about our world.
However, in a rapidly changing world, the knowledge gained today may not suffice
tomorrow. Hence, the skills required for obtaining knowledge must be learnt. These
are the very skills that are learnt in the process of studying science.
Many topics in science are more easily learnt by direct observation than by reading
about them. Some abstract phenomena become visible through the effects they have.
Hence, we do experiments related to them. They help to learn the skills of inference
and verification. While learning science, these skills are learnt and internalized.
This is an important objective of learning science.
That we should be able to articulate what we have learnt, explain it to others, use it
for further studies and finally bring about proper changes in our behavior is also an
expectation from the learning of science. That is why, it is important to ensure that
along with the content of the subject, these skills are also developed.
Can you recall? is a section for reviewing the related topics already learnt, while
the purpose of Can you tell? is introducing a topic by bringing together what the
children might already know about a topic through their own reading or experience.
Try this is meant to give some specific experience while Let's try this are the
parts that teachers must demonstrate to the class. Use your brain power! makes
children apply the knowledge gained. Always remember... gives some important
instructions or values. The sections Find out, Do you know? and Science watch
are to create an awareness of the vast information that cannot be included in the
textbook and to inculcate the habit of doing reference work independently.
Teachers can see for themselves that this textbook is not meant for reading and
explaining but for guiding students to gain knowledge by carrying out the given
activities. Reading the textbook after the children have carried out the activities and
discussed them in the class will make it easy and will also help to bring together and
reinforce what they have already learnt. The attractive pictures will support their
efforts to learn.
Teachers should prepare well for discussions under Can you tell?, Use your brain
power! etc. and for the various activities and experiments. They should maintain an
informal atmosphere during such discussions and activities, encourage everyone to
participate and make efforts to organize Science Days, presentations in the class, etc.
Front Cover : Experiments included in the textbook. Back Cover : Biodiversity on the Kaas Plateau)
Competencies Related to General Science : Standard VI
It is expected that by the end of Standard VI students will develop the following competencies :
The Living World
1. Observing the various components of
the surroundings.
2. Explaining the importance and
necessity of the classification of living
things.
3. Classifying the various components of
the surroundings on the basis of their
characteristics and other attributes.
4. Classifying living things on the basis of
their similarities, differences and
characteristics.
5. Giving examples of plants and animals
according to their different
characteristics.
6. Making notes about animals in the
surroundings – domestic, wild and
those that are a nuisance, and giving
reasons for such categorization.
Substances
1. Explaining the characteristics of the
three states of substances.
2. Understanding the effect of heat on the
state of a substance.
3. Relating the phenomenon of change of
state to its application in daily life
4. Verifying the properties of substances
and their uses.
5. Giving examples of metals used in
day-to-day life and verifying their
Natural Resources and Disaster Management
1. Learning about the importance and uses of air,
water and land.
2. Obtaining information about the proportions of the
various constituents of air, water and land.
3. Explaining with reasons the need for the appropriate
use of natural resources.
4. Obtaining samples of soil from different locations
and noting down observations about their colour
and differences in the size of particles.
5. Explaining the meaning of disaster' and the
reasons why they occur.
6. Classifying disasters as man-made or natural,
from a study of instances of their occurrence.
7. Suggesting ways of preventing disasters.
8. Stating ways of using technology to prevent
damage in case of a disaster, and acting accordingly
if the need arises.
Motion, Force, Machines
1. Explaining the concept of motion and giving
day-to-day examples of motion.
2. Understanding the differences between the
different types of motion.
3. Classifying the different types of force by
observing examples of force in everyday life.
4. Observing machines in day-to-day use and
classifying them as simple or complex machines.
5. Verifying the utility of simple machines and
giving examples of their uses in everyday life.
6. Helping in the maintenance of machines used in
their homes.
properties.
6. Observing a variety of substances
found in the surroundings and
determining whether they are natural or
man-made.
7. Understanding the process of production
of paper, rubber and synthetic yarn.
Diet and Nutrition
1. Understanding that food is necessary for obtaining energy as well as for fighting diseases.
2. Changing one's dietary habits.
3. Understanding the differences between nutrition, malnutrition, and overnutrition and
suggesting measures for preventing deficiency diseases.
4. Explaining the structure and importance of the human skeletal system and the skin.
5. Drawing diagrams of the skeletal system, bones, joints and the skin.
Energy
1. Explaining the concepts of work and energy and their
inter-relationship.
2. Classifying energy resources and using them in daily life.
3. Giving methods of saving energy; relating energy resources and
energy transformations to daily life.
4. Explaining the phenomenon of sound and the production of sound.
5. Understanding the causes and effects of noise pollution and
implementing the remedies for it in daily life.
6. Explaining the concept of light and classifying the various sources
of light as natural or man-made.
7. Verifying that light is propagated in straight lines.
8. Constructing a pinhole camera and observing how light travels
through it.
9. Having fun casting shadows and understanding the scientific
principle behind it.
10. Verifying the properties and characteristics of magnets by doing
experiments.
11. Classifying magnets, giving their uses and stating their importance
in daily life.
The Universe
1. Learning about the
universe and its various
components.
2. Studying and comparing
the galaxies, stars,
planets, satellites,
asteroids, comets and
meteors that exist in the
universe.
3. Making models of the
various components of
the universe.
4. Understanding the
scientific principles
underlying the various
events occurring in the
universe and explaining
them to others.
CONTENTS
No.
Chapters
Page No.
..................
............
ti i
..........................
.........
..................
................
..........
1. Natural Resources – Air, Water and Land ............................................ 1
2. The Living World ........
3. Diversity in Living Things and their Classification ...........................
4. Disaster Management
Substances in the Surroundings – Their States and Properties ...........
Substances in Daily Use ...............
Nutrition and Diet
8. Our Skeletal System and the Skin .........
9. Motion and Types of Motion
10. Force and Types of Force
..............
11. Work and Energy ..........
................
12. Simple Machines ...........
13. Sound
14. Light and the Formation of Shadows .......
15. Fun with Magnets .........
..................
16. The Universe .............
................ 112
.....
............
.............
1.
Natural Resources – Air, Water and Land
Atmosphere
Observe.
Observe the picture alongside and
answer the questions.
1. Where do we see the birds ?
2. Where is the cow grazing ?
3. Locate the trees and the road.
4. Where does the river come from?
How does it flow?
5. Where is the aeroplane ?
6. Where are the fish seen?
7. On what is the sailboat floating ?
Hydrosphere
Lithosphere
Natural resources
1.1 : Spheres of the earth
You can see that some things in the picture are
in water, some on land, and some in the sky, that is,
Air, water and land are
in the air. Thus, all things on the earth are associated
the factors important
with air, water and land. Air, water and land are
for sustaining the living
called the earth's atmosphere, hydrosphere and
world on the earth
lithosphere, respectively. Moreover, different living
and for fulfilling their basic
needs. They are called
things occupy these three spheres of the earth.
natural resources.
These living things and the parts of the lithosphere,
hydrosphere and atmosphere which they occupy are
together called the biosphere. These spheres have
formed on the earth naturally. We have learnt all
this in the previous standards.
The atmosphere is the layer of air that surrounds
the earth. The surface of the earth comprises water
and land, that is, the hydrosphere and lithosphere. Of
these, the hydrosphere occupies a much larger part
than the lithosphere. Figure 1.2 shows the proportion
Land 29%
of land and water on the earth's surface.
We also look upon these natural components in
Water 71%
solid, liquid and gaseous form as resources. In other
words, we use them to fulfil our requirements. Let us
now study all these three components in detail. 1.2: Proportion of land and water
Can you recall ? What are the five layers of the atmosphere?
Air
The air in the atmosphere around the earth contains nitrogen, oxygen, carbon dioxide,
six inert gases, nitrogen dioxide, sulphur dioxide, water vapour and dust particles. The
troposphere contains about 80% of the total mass of gases in the air, while this proportion
is about 19% in the stratosphere. Further, in the mesosphere and ionosphere, the proportion
of the mass of gases goes on decreasing. Gases are not found in the exosphere and beyond.
Other constituents
of air 0.07%
Argon 0.9%
Carbon dioxide
0.03%
Oxygen 21%
You can see that air is a mixture of
several gases and is the chief constituent
of the earth's atmosphere. Besides these
gases, air also contains water vapour
and dust particles. The amount of the
gases in the air is the greatest near the
surface and decreases as we go higher
and higher from the surface. That is, air
becomes rarer at higher altitudes.
The proportions of the constituents
of air and some of their uses are given
here.
Nitrogen
78%
1.3 : Proportions of the various
gases in the air
Some uses of gases in air
• Nitrogen - Helps living things • Argon – Used in electric bulbs.
to build the necessary proteins. • Helium – Used for obtaining low
It is useful in the production of temperature and also for generating
ammonia and in airtight packaging lift in airships.
of foodstuffs.
• Neon – Used in decorative lights
• Oxygen – Necessary for respiration and for street lighting.
in living things and for combustion. • Krypton - Used in fluorescent
• Carbon dioxide – Plants use it for tubes.
producing their food. Used in fire · Xenon – Used in flash photography.
extinguishers.
T Always remember... )
The living world on the earth is sustained due to the balance between various
gases and other constituents of air. The atmosphere is a very important filter. It
allows the light and heat of the sun to reach the earth, which is necessary for
life. But it prevents the harmful elements from reaching the earth. It is in the
atmosphere that fog, clouds, snow and rain are produced.
2
Observe and discuss.
What is the similarity in the three pictures below?
UGCB 3595
1.4: Air pollution
All the above pictures show large scale emission
of smoke through different agencies. This smoke
directly mixes with the atmosphere, disturbing the
balance between the constituents of air. This is called
air pollution. Harmful gases are given out through
combustion of fuels in vehicles and in big industries
and also through incomplete combustion of fuels like
wood and coal. As a result, air pollution is increasing
day by day.
Harmful substances
released in air through
combustion of fuels
• Nitrogen dioxide
• Carbon dioxide
Carbon monoxide
Sulphur dioxide
• Soot
Do you know?
Ozone layer – the protective shell
There is a layer of ozone (02) gas in
the lower part of stratosphere. Ozone gas is
not directly useful for the survival of living
things, yet it is very important for living
things to have this layer of ozone at a high
altitude around the earth. The ultra violet
rays coming from the sun are very harmful
for living things. The ozone gas absorbs these
rays. As a result, life on earth is protected.
The ozone layer is destroyed if chemical
gases like carbon tetrachloride or the
chlorofluorocarbons used in air conditioners
and refrigerators mix with the air.
The 16th of September is celebrated
as “Ozone Protection Day'all over the
world to make everyone aware of the
importance of ozone.
In metropolitan cities like Mumbai,
Pune or Nagpur boards are displayed
at places of heavy traffic to show
the proportions of the various
constituents of the air at that place.
Due to these boards, we can see the
amount of harmful elements in the
air.
11-01-2015 7:27
Ramtal mums
AQI
Pollutants
Ozone
CO
NOX
PM10
PM2.5
me NA Carbon Monoxide NA
Use your brain power!
What would have happened if there were no air on the earth?
Water
Purpose for which
water is used
Amount of
| Water (approx.)
in litres
Try this.
- Bath
- Brushing teeth
| - Washing clothes
and utensils
- Mopping the floor
- Drinking
|- Cooking
Total use of water
Observe how much water is used and
for what purposes it is used in your house
for a whole day. Record it in a chart like
the one shown here. Discuss this data
in the class. Divide the total amount of
water used in your house by the number
of persons to find out how much water
each person needs.
You will see that it is almost
impossible for us to spend even a single
day without water. We need to drink three
to four litres of water every day so that all
our bodily functions run smoothly. Other
living things also require water although
the amount of water they need may vary
according to the size of their body. Thus,
we see that water is very important.
If hydrogen gas burns in air, it
combines with oxygen and water is
formed. We have learnt about some
characteristics of water in the previous
standards.
In nature, water occurs in three
states. Water does not have colour,
taste or odour. Many substances readily
dissolve in water. Therefore, water is a
universal solvent.
The blood of animals and the sap
in plants contain a very high proportion
of water. No living thing can survive
without water. Therefore it is said that
‘Water is life.'
Water available on earth
Percentage
97%
Seas, Oceans
Observe and discuss.
2.7%
Groundwater, ice, Water available
and water II for drinking
in other forms ♡
for
Water available
drinking (fresh water)
Total
100%
Seas and Oceans
We cannot use all the water on earth
because seawater is salty. Some water is
in the frozen state. A very small quantity
of water is available for drinking. Yet it
is enough for all living things.
1.5 : Distribution of water on the earth
Find out.
In what ways is the water in seas and oceans useful even though it is salty ?
Observe and discuss.
For which purposes is water being used ?
Do other living things use
water like we do?
a
We use water in large
quantities. We have learnt
that water on the earth is
regulated through the water
cycle. The water vapour
formed from oceans is the
main source of water in the
water cycle. It gets converted
into rain, creating fresh water
sources on earth.
1.6 : Uses of water on the earth
Always remember...)
We get water from natural sources
such as streams, rivers, ponds, springs and
lakes. Man also digs wells and borewells
to lift ground water. Apart from this, man
has also constructed bunds and dams of
various sizes on rivers.
Due to the uncontrolled use of water
for an increasing population, industry and
farming, it is now in short supply. Water
scarcity has become a serious problem.
1. Use water sparingly.
2. Block water, let it percolate.
3 Store water wherever possible.
4. Reuse water wherever possible.
Remember, stored water does not
become stale at once.
• What is land made of ? • Is land flat everywhere?
Can you tell ? • What do you see on land ? • Does man produce soil/land ?
• What has man created on land ?
• If a deep pit is dug in the ground, what do you find there?
Land
Land is seen in the form of stones, soil, big rocks. It is not flat everywhere. It is
hilly in some places and flat in others. All terrestrial animals including man live on
land. Some terrestrials dig burrows in the ground for shelter. This means that they use
land for fulfilling their need. We also use land for farming and for building houses and
roads. We make use of plants and animals in the forests that grow on land. The
minerals, crude oil and natural gas obtained from the earth (land) are very important
for us. It means that land is an important resource. Let us see exactly what land is
made of.
( 5 )
Soil
1. Take a transparent plastic bottle, a
Let's try this.
handful of soil, some stones, sand, some
dry leaves and water.
2. Cut off the upper tapering part of bottle.
Dry leaves
Put the rest of the materials in the lower
Soil
part and add water.
3. Stir the mixture thoroughly and put it
aside.
Sand
Observe it the next day and answer.
Small stones
• How does the mixture in the bottle look
Big stones
now?
• Do you see layers in it ?
1.7 : Layers of the mixture in the bottle • What is seen in the different layers from
The land on earth also looks like this. If a top to bottom?
pipeline is being laid in your neighbourhood,
observe carefully the pits dug for this
purpose. You will see some layers under the
land surface, as shown in the accompanying
figure.
- Humus
If the land has mature soil, the topmost
layer is formed by the decomposition of the
remains of plants and animals. This layer is
Immature
called 'humus'. It is usually found in dense
forests. The land below this is full of sand,
soil, small stones, worms, and insects. Soil
and pieces of bedrock are found below this
Layer of
layer of land. This soil is immature. Further
soil and
below this layer the proportion of soil
small rocks
decreases and that of rock increases. This is
the layer of bedrock. The main minerals in
the soil are derived from these rocks. That is
why, soil in different regions is different. The
Bedrock
colour and texture of soil are both determined
by the bedrock.
1.8 : Layers of land
The process of soil formation
The soil on the land is formed by a natural process. The abiotic components of soil are
supplied through the weathering of the bedrock. Due to the heat, cold and water of the sun,
wind and rain respectively, the bedrock breaks down into pieces. Stones, sand and soil are
formed from these pieces. Microbes, worms and insects are found among them. Rodents
like mice and rats are also found here. The roots of trees growing on the land also help
weathering of rocks. The process of soil formation is slow and continuous. It takes about
a thousand years for a 2.5 cm thick layer of mature soil to form.
0
soil
O
Soil can get destroyed in a short period due to floods, storms and human activities
such as mining. That is why, it is necessary to conserve soil and to prevent erosion of
land. The best remedy for this is to increase the green cover of the land. Erosion of land is
reduced if grass, trees and bushes are grown in it.
ve Try this.
Obtain specimens of soil from various places in your surroundings
such as your own yard, a garden, hills, river banks, fields and
rocky ground. Note the differences in the specimens with respect
to colour, feel, texture and the size of the particles.
Do you know?
Use your brain power!
Humus is the layer formed on soil due to the
decomposition of dead plants and animals
by microbes. Humus supplies nutrients
to the soil. Humus is also important for
aerating the soil and for holding water in
the soil. The proportion of humus in the
upper layer of good fertile soil is about 33%
to 50%.
What are the constituents of soil ?
Classify them as biotic and abiotic
constituents.
Forests on land got buried underground due to the great upheavals that took place
on the earth many ages ago. After that, the process of formation of fossil fuels
from the remains of living things took place underground. We get fuels like petrol,
diesel, kerosene, paraffin and other useful materials like tar and wax from
the fossil fuel called crude oil.
Living things use land, water and air
available on earth and so does man. However,
the portions of these resources that are actually
put to use are very small as compared to the
whole earth. Look at the following table.
Land
29%
Potable water / fresh water 0.3%
Oxygen
21%
Even in these small proportions, the
resources shown in the above table are
sufficient for all living things. Only, it is very
necessary for man to control his greed. In other
words, he must use these resources judiciously,
with the awareness that they are meant for all
other living things and not just for mankind.
Institutes at work
India Meteorological
Department (IMD) was
established in 1875 for studying
the weather in the Indian
subcontinent. The main function
of this institute is to observe the
weather and to make weather
forecasts. This institute also
conducts research related to
changes in weather, makes
forecasts about rains and studies
the developments related to
global warming
What we have learnt-
• The elements available in nature
which fulfil the basic needs of living
things are called natural resources.
Air, water and land are important
natural resources.
Soil has both biotic and abiotic
constituents.
• There are many constituents of air such
as nitrogen, oxygen, carbon dioxide,
inert gases, water vapour and dust
particles.
• The ozone layer is a protective shell of
the earth.
• Natural resources should be used
carefully and sparingly.
Exercise
1. Fill in the blanks.
(a) The layer of ozone gas absorbs
............ rays that come from the
sun to the earth.
(b) Of the total water available on
the earth, fresh water forms .....
percent.
(c) Both ....... and ......... constituents
are present in the soil.
2. Why is it said that – ?
(a) The ozone layer is a protective
shell of the earth.
(b) Water is life.
(c) Seawater is useful even though it is
not potable.
3. What will happen if –
(a) Microbes in the soil get destroyed.
(b) The number of vehicles and
factories in your surroundings
increases.
(c) The total supply of potable water is
finished.
Match the following.
Group ‘A’ Group 'B'
(1) Carbon (a) Generation of
dioxide
soil
(2) Oxygen (b) Rain
(3) Water
(c) Plants and
vapour
food production
(4) Microbes (d) Combustion
5. Name the following.
(a) Constituents of the biosphere
(b) Biotic constituents of soil
(c) Fossil fuel
(d) Inert gases in air
(e) Gases that are harmful to
the ozone layer
6. True or false ?
(a) Land and soil are the same thing.
(b) The water in a lake is called ground
water.
(c) It takes about 1000 years to form a
25 cm thick layer of soil.
(d) Radon is used in decorative lights.
7. Answer in your own words.
(a) Explain with the help of a diagram
how soil is formed.
(b) Why is there a shortage of water
even though it occupies about 71%
of the earth's surface ?
(c) What are the various constituents of
air ? Write their uses.
(d) Why are air, water and land
considered to be valuable natural
resources ?
(Activity :
• Obtain detailed information about
the work of the India Meteorological
Department.
• Find a remedy for water scarcity.
8
2.
The Living World
List the things seen in the picture. Say whether they are
living or non-living things.
Can you recall ?
Characteristics of living
things
There are many kinds of
plants and animals around us.
They show some similarities
and some differences. Yet,
with the help of certain
features, we can tell that
they are all living things.
These features are not seen in
non-living things. Such
features are said to be the
characteristics of living
things. Let us study these
characteristics.
grand
2.1 : Various things in our environment
Can you tell?
What differences do we see between the young ones and the
adults in the picture ?
Growth
2.2 : Growth in living things
A baby grows up to become an adult person – woman or man. During the period
of its growth, the baby gains in height, weight and strength. In the same manner, all
animals grow into adults in a certain period. Generally, humans require 18 to 21 years
for this growth.
Find out how long it takes for the young ones of hens, cows and dogs to grow
into adults.
0
Loose
thread
Stretched
thread
- Try this.
Tie a thread to the tip of a potted sapling.
Keep the thread stretched and tie it to a peg or
nail above the plant. What do you observe after
ten to fifteen days?
What tells us that the plant has grown taller ?
In all plants, it is mainly the width and height
of the stem that grows. As they grow, some plants
develop branches while others do not.
Though all living things grow, animals grow
only for a certain period. Plants, on the other
hand, grow as long as they live. The growth of
living things occurs from within the body, which
means that growth occurs in all parts of the body.
2.3 : Sapling in a pot
2.4: Growth in banyan and coconut trees
Use your brain power!
What differences do you see in the growth of trees like the mango, banyan
and peepal and that of the bamboo, coconut and toddy palms.
Sunlight
Oxygen
Food is necessary for growth
Plants make their own food in
sunlight. Plants produce food from
water, nutrients in the soil and the
carbon dioxide present in the air.
This process takes place in the
leaves of plants. It is brought about
in the presence of sunlight, with the
help of the chlorophyll in the leaves.
This process of food production is
called photosynthesis. During this
process, plants give out oxygen.
Plants appear mainly green in
colour due to the chlorophyll in
them.
Carbon
dioxide
Water and
nutrients
2.5 : Photosynthesis
(10)
2.6 : Intake of food by animals
Animals, however, do not have chlorophyll.
The intake of food and
They do not produce their own food. They search
the resultant growth is an
for food. Animals such as goats, sheep, horses eat
important characteristic of
grass while wild animals such as tigers and lions
living things.
meet their need for food by hunting other animals
which live on plants.
Respiration
Observe and discuss.
1. Hold your hand in front of your nose or
keep your hand on your chest. What do
you feel ?
2. If we observe a sleeping dog, what
movement of its belly do we see?
Living things need oxygen in order
to live. Inhaling oxygen and exhaling the
carbon dioxide formed in the body due
A leaf of a plant
to the use of oxygen is called respiration.
Animals such as fish, snake, mouse, etc.
have specific organs for respiration. On
the other hand, plants respire by means
of microscopic pores on their stems and
leaves.
Gills
Respiration is a characteristic of
2.7 : Respiration in living things
living things.
Nose
Can you recall ?
1. Is all the food we eat used by the body?
2. What is the unused part of food converted into ?
Excretion
Waste substances are formed during the many processes
that take place in the bodies of animals. These are called excreta
and the process of eliminating them from the body is called
excretion. Animals have specific organs for excretion.
Plants, too, excrete. For example, some plants shed leaves
in a specific season. Waste substances stored in the leaves of
plants are shed along with the leaves.
2.8 : A tree shedding leaves
(11)
Try this.
Take a transparent plastic bag. Tie it over a leaf of a
plant as shown in the picture. Observe it after six to seven
hours. What do you see?
Droplets of water collect on the inside of the bag. It
means that, plants excrete water in the form of vapour.
Qebe
Excretion is a characteristic of living things.
Use your brain power!
What is the sticky substance
seen on the stems of the babul
( (acacia) or drumstick trees ?
2.9 : Excretion on the leaves
of a plant
Observe and discuss.
The mimosa
Have you experienced this ? What happened
immediately after the following actions ?
1. Light flashed suddenly into your eyes.
2. Suddenly you felt a pinprick.
3. The leaves of the mimosa plant were touched.
4. At sunset, lamps on the street or courtyard are lit
and insects gather around the lamps.
Responsiveness to stimuli and movement
Living things act in various ways when
responding to a stimulus. If you suddenly enter a
cowshed, the cows and buffalos stand up, begin to
move, one or two may even start mooing. These
are all movements.
A creeper planted in the courtyard leans towards
a support. A potted plant placed in a window grows
towards sunlight. It means that plants, too, show
movement. Living things move of their own accord.
The movement or the change taking place in
a living thing at such a time is their response to a
stimulus. An event that occurs in our surroundings is
a stimulus. The ability of living things to respond to
a stimulus is called their responsiveness to stimuli.
A potted plant
2.10: Responsiveness and movement
PS
Use your brain power!)
1. In each of the examples
given above, what is the
stimulus and what is the
response ?
2. What is the main difference
between the movements of
plants and animals ?
Responsiveness to stimuli
is a characteristic of living things.
(12)
Can you tell? What do we learn from these pictures ?
Reproduction
Living things produce other living
things like themselves. Some animals
give birth to their young ones. Some
lay eggs. Their young ones hatch out
of the eggs. New plants are produced
A bird and its eggs
from the seeds, stems or leaves of
plants.
The process by which a living thing
generates a new living thing like itself
is called reproduction or procreation.
Reproduction is a characteristic of
living things.
Bryophyllum
Use your brain power!
A mare and her foal Rose cuttings
2.11 : Reproduction
Why have so many types of plants and
animals been able to survive on the
earth even today?
Observe and discuss.
}
A definite lifespan
2.12 : Lifespan
At a certain stage of life, living things become capable of reproduction. Later on
in life reproduction stage, their organs become weak and still later, their life comes to
an end. In other words, living things die. The lifespans of different animals and plants
are different. For example, the lifespan of the dog is about 12 to 18 years, while the
ostrich lives for 50 years.
You may have wondered what exactly the living things are, how they came into
being, and so on.
13
Do you know?
The lifespan of the giant turtle found on
the Galapagos Island in South America
is about 170 years. On the other hand,
the lifespan of the mayfly ranges from
(1 hour to 24 hours.
opy Can you tell ?
Observe a honeycomb and a wall.
What are they made of ?
You may have seen the small
compartments of a honeycomb. These
compartments are joined together to form
a honeycomb. A wall has bricks. To
construct a wall, we firmly join the bricks
together.
2.13 : A wall
A honeycomb
A cellular structure
Living things are made of small units called cells. All the co
actions and processes in the bodies of living things are brought
Amoeba
about with the help of these microscopic cells.
Some living things are made of a single cell. These are called
unicellular organisms. On the other hand, the living things that
Paramoecium
are made of many cells are called multicellular organisms. The
amoeba and some other microorganisms are unicellular while
man, cow, mouse, cockroach, elephants, banyan tree, the onion
plant, etc. are all multicellular organisms. All the characteristics
of living things are seen in every cell of a living thing, whether it
is unicellular or multicellular.
Cellular structure is the main characteristic of living things,
even though the number of cells may vary.
2.14 : Various living things
(14)
Institutes at work
The institutes that work for the survey and conservation of the various plants
and animals in different parts of India are the Botanical Survey of India (1890)
and the Zoological Survey of India (1916) respectively. In case you
find an unfamiliar plant or animal in your surroundings, you can
communicate with these institutes to obtain more information about it.
U
Can you tell ? In what way are plants and animals useful to us ?
Vasaka
2.15 : Useful living things
Useful living things
Plants are used for household as
well as industrial purposes. For example,
fenugreek (methi), potato, okra (bhendi),
apple, banana are used as food while
vasaka (adulsa), hirada, behada, asparagus
are used as medicines.
Animals are also useful to us. Dogs,
cats, cows, buffalos are kept for domestic
uses. Fish, sheep, fowl are used as food,
while animals like horses, oxen, camel
prove useful in various occupations. The
earthworm is very useful in agriculture.
Harmful living things
Some animals and plants around
us are harmful to man. For example,
mosquitoes and flies spread diseases.
Cockroaches, mice, rats destroy our food.
Lice, ticks also spread diseases. The bites
of some poisonous lizards, spiders, snakes
and scorpions can even cause death. If
wild elephants enter human settlements,
they cause a lot of destruction.
Some plants, too, can be harmful, as
for example, the dodder, parthenium and
other weeds.
Pods of the nettle, colocasia leaves
cause itching. Plants like oleander, lantana
have strong odours. The datura plant is
poisonous. Uncontrolled growth of fungi
and algae in water pollutes drinking water
and may cause the spread of diseases.
Datura
Colocasia leaves
2.16 : Harmful living things
C15
Wild animals
Wild animals that hunt other animals for food
are called predators, for example, tigers, lions,
wolves, leopards. Sometimes, due to deforestation,
such animals enter human settlements in search of
food and may kill domestic animals or people.
Find out)
Watch TV channels such as National
Geographic, Discovery and collect information
regarding various plants and animals found
in our surroundings. Have a class discussion
with reference to the collected information.
2.17 : Wild animals
MV Always remember...
Many plants and animals in nature satisfy our needs. The use of such plants and
animals should be restricted only to our needs. We should not pluck leaves, flowers
and fruit unnecessarily. Animals should not be hunted. They should not be teased
just for fun. It is the responsibility and duty of all of us to protect plants and animals.
What we have learnt-
Growth, respiration, excretion, reproduction, responsiveness to stimuli, movement,
a definite lifespan and a cellular structure are the characteristics of living
things.
Animals grow for certain period of their life. Plants, however, grow as long
as they live.
Animals have specific organs for respiration, while plants respire through
microscopic pores on their leaves and stems.
• The process of eliminating waste products from the body is called excretion.
• All living things have the ability to reproduce.
• Living things move because of their ability to respond to stimuli.
• Plants show spontaneous movements but they cannot leave their place and go
elsewhere as animals do.
Living things have a definite lifespan at the end of which they die.
Many animals and plants are useful to us in our daily life. Some animals
and plants can be harmful to us.
• The smallest unit of a living thing is the cell.
( 16
Exercise
1. Write the answers to the following
questions in your own words.
(a) What are the differences between
plants and animals ?
(b) What are the similarities between
plants and animals ?
(c) How is the plant kingdom useful to
us ?
(d) How is the animal kingdom useful
to us?
(e) What makes living things different
from non-living things ?
2. What helps them to breathe ?
(a) A fish (b) A snake
(c) A crane (d) An earthworm
(e) Man (f) A banyan tree
(g) A caterpillar
3. Fill in the blanks with the proper
words from the brackets.
(a) The process by which plants make
their own food is called .............
(b) To inhale ......... and to exhale
........ is called respiration.
(c) The elimination of waste
substances from the body is called
4. Write the uses of these animals and
plants.
Animals : Honeybees, sharks, yaks,
sheep, earthworms, dogs, bivalves,
horses, mice.
Plants : Ginger, mango, eucalyptus,
babul (acacia), teak, spinach, aloevera,
turmeric, holy basil, karanja, moh,
mulberry, grapevine.
What are the peculiarities of the
movements of these living things ?
Living things : Snakes, tortoises,
kangaroos, eagles, chameleons,
frogs, gulmohur, sweet potato
creeper, dolphins, ants, rattlesnakes,
grasshoppers, earthworms.
Write in detail about how the
plants and animals found in your
surroundings prove useful or
harmful.
-
6.
(Activity :
Obtain information about the
work of the Botanical Survey of
India and the Zoological Survey
of India by visiting the websites :
www.bsi.gov.in www.zsi.gov.in
Collect information about the
lifespan of various animals, make
a chart and display it in your class.
Gather information about the
poisonous snakes found in India and
present it in a Science Exhibition.
............
(d) The ability to respond to an event
is called ..... to .......
(e) On completing their lifespan, every
living thing .........
(oxygen, dies, excretion,
carbon dioxide, responsiveness,
photosynthesis, stimuli)
17
3.
Diversity in Living Things and their Classification
Can you recall?
In which spheres of the earth do living things exist ?
The geographical conditions at different places on the earth are very different. We
find that living things exist in all these diverse conditions. When we live in a certain
place, we adjust to the conditions there. Various types of living things have survived
because of their ability to adjust themselves to the conditions in their surroundings.
OY
Can you tell? Are the plants and animals that you have seen all alike?
Diversity in plants
Various types of plants are found in many places around us. Some plants like grass
are short, while others are tall and have a canopy. Some plants grow underwater, while
some others float on water. We find that some plants grow even in deserts. Moreover, we
find that there is a lot of variety in the same type of plant. For example, there are different
varieties of rice or wheat, different types of roses, and mangoes of different flavours. Some
plants grow even without stems, leaves or roots. These are very different from ordinary
plants. Let us study this diversity among plants.
Plants make their own food in sunlight. Such plants are called autotrophic plants.
For example, the hibiscus, pomegranate, periwinkle, etc. Some plants like funguses,
loranthus, dodder use other plants for food and are said to be heterotrophic. Plants
like the pitcher plant even consume insects. They are insectivorous.
3.1 : Method of nutrition in plants
18
The structure of a plant
Plant structure can generally be divided into two parts – the stem which grows above
the ground and the root which grows below the ground surface.
The root, stem and leaves are the main parts of plants. From time to time,
plants bear flowers for reproduction. Flowers are transformed into fruits.
Fruits have seeds. Seeds give rise to new plants.
The flower : This
is the most attractive
part of a plant. It is
connected to the stem
by a stalk which may be
long or short. A flower
has a typical colour and
shape. The flower is
an important means of
reproduction.
The leaf : The
leaf is flat. It plays an
important role in the
production of food.
Leaves are mainly of
two types : simple and
compound leaves.
Simple leaf
(Ex. Hibiscus)
Compound leaf
(Ex. Rose)
The stem : The
height, shape and size of
a plant depends upon the
stem. The stem carries
out the functions of
production, conduction
and storage of food. In
some plants, it has the
function of reproduction.
It gives support to other
parts of the plant.
The fruit : Fruits
have different shapes.
Fruits contain one or
more seeds. The pods
of beans and peas are
actually fruits.
3.2 : The structure of a plant
TU
The root : Roots hold the soil firmly and anchor
the plant. The main functions of the root are to absorb
and transport water and nutrients from the soil. The
roots of the carrot and radish also store food. There are
two types of roots : taproot and fibrous root.
Taproot Fibrous root
(Hibiscus, Banyan) (Onion, Grass)
Need for classification of plants
Up to now, information about lakhs of plants has been collected. While studying
the diversity in plants, they are classified for the sake of convenience on the basis of the
similarities and differences in their structure, their organs and their other characteristics.
19
The scientist Carolus Linnaeus made the first scientific classification of plants.
Initially, it was his method of classification that was used by all.
Take a round through a garden or in your surroundings
Observe and discuss.
and list the plants that you see. Draw their pictures as
well. Draw a table as shown below and complete it on the basis of the information you
gather. Discuss it in the class.
Name | Where Nature of the Height Branches Leaves Flowers Nature of Uses
of the does stem (Short, | (Nature, | (Colour, (Colour, the fruit (Which
plant the (Circumference, medium, number, shape, fragrance, | (Colour, part is
plant | colour, bark, very tall, etc.) edge, shape, etc.) shape, used.)
occurl | hard/soft, etc.) | etc.)
etc.)
hardness
or softness,
etc.)
grow
Rose
Classification of plants
We can easily notice the
differences in the shape and height
of the plants in our surroundings.
It is easy to classify the plants on
the basis of this observation.
3.3 : Diversity in plants
Can you tell 2 1. What are the similarities between a mango,
a banyan and a tamarind tree?
Trees : Some plants grow tall. Their stem, or trunk, is hard
and strong. They have branches at some height above the
ground. They bear flowers and fruit for many years. Such
plants are called trees. Trees are tall, big and perennial, i.e.,
they live for many years.
20
2. What are the similarities between the hibiscus,
oleander and lantana plants ?
Shrubs : Some plants grow close to the ground.
They give out branches very close to the ground.
They are shorter and smaller than trees, but they
have a thick and hard stem. The oleander, hibiscus,
lantana, koranti and rose are shrubs that may grow
up to two to three metres.
3. What are the similarities between the fenugreek
and periwinkle plants ?
Herbs : Herbs grow 1 to 1.5 metres tall. The stems of herbs are green and quite flexible as
compared to those of trees and bushes. Herbs may live for a few months or up to two years.
According to the size and height of their stems, plants can be classified
into three types : trees, shrubs and herbs.
7 Have you seen vines like the pumpkin, the railroad creeper,
ÜYN Can you tell ?) kavali. watermelon or the grapevine ? How do they grow ?
Vines : Some vines need vertical support for growing,
so
while some others spread on the ground. Climbers like the
money plant have aerial roots. Have you seen the cucumber
tendrils that look like a spring ? Of what use could they be?
Touch the stem of any vines. What do you feel ?
4
The stem of a creeper is w
very flexible, soft and green.
It grows rapidly with the help
of a support.
Alle a
32
3.4 : Various creepers and climbers
Can you tell?
Can you tell 2 For how many years do crops like bajra, wheat,
corn, radish, marigold live?
The lifecycle of plants like jowar, sunflower is completed in one year.
These plants are called annuals. The lifecycle of plants like the carrot,
beetroot is of two years. They are called biennials. Shrubs like the hibiscus
and oleander and trees like mango and gulmohur live for several years and
bear flowers and fruit. They are called perennials.
According to the period of their lifecycle, plants are classified as
annuals, biennials, perennials.
21 )
Oye Can you tell? To which part of plants are butterflies and insects attracted ?
Plants that bear flowers are called flowering plants, while the plants
that never bear flowers are called non-flowering plants. Non-flowering
plants may not have organs like roots, stems, leaves.
Use your brain power! )
• What type of plants are
toadstools and mushrooms ?
• What type of plant is the
fig?
• Do ferns, algae, money
plant bear flowers ?
Do you know?)
The world's largest flower is found in
Indonesia. The diameter of the flower of the
plant Rafflesia arnoldi is about one metre. The
world's smallest flower is of the plant called
Wolffia or duckweed. Its diameter is as small
as 0.5 mm.
Can you tell ?
1. Where does the pomegranate shrub grow? 2. Where does the lotus grow ?
3. Where do bulrushes, the railroad creeper grow? 4. Where does the dodder plant grow?
We see different plants growing in different places around us. Plants can be
classified according to their habitat or the place where they grow. Land, water, marshy
areas, deserts and even a big tree are the various habitats of plants.
Water
Land
A desert
Use your brain power!
• Why does the water hyacinth float
on water?
• Why is the stem of the cactus fleshy ?
• What different criteria are used to
classify plants ?
3.5: Habitats of plants
(22)
Diversity and classification in animals
Different animals have developed different shapes to survive in the environment.
There is a great variety in the body structure of animals too. The amoeba that cannot
be seen with our eyes, the huge elephant, the small snail, the fish that swims in water,
a kite that flies high in the sky, butterflies that flit around flowers, a house lizard that
crawls on a wall are all animals. Each has different characteristics.
Animals have body parts like a head, a neck, a torso, a tail and limbs for movement.
They have various organ systems which carry on various functions inside their body.
In this respect, too, there is a lot of diversity in animals.
Can you tell ?
n
GOD
What are the differences in the
body structure of animals like
a snake, a lizard, a tiger, a fish, an
eagle, a hen, a crab, a housefly,
an earthworm, a crocodile and a
grasshopper?
We see a variety in animals
with respect to their food as well.
Since animals depend on others for
their food, they are found in places
where food is available. Different
animals have different methods of
obtaining and eating food. This,
too, leads to differences in their
body structure.
Try this.
3.6 : Diversity in animals
Observe the animals in your surroundings. Make a list of their names.
Complete the following table on the basis of the information obtained
and discuss it in the class.
What is their food? Where do they live? The special feature that
How do they eat it?
you found
Name of the
animal
You will not see all animals in your own surroundings. Why is it so? Which
are the other animals that you know of, but have not seen ? Collect information
about them using the above table. Take the help of websites like www.earthlife.net,
www.discovery.com, www.seaworld.org, www.kidsgowild.com, www.worldwildlife.org,
www.nationalgeographic.com.
23
Take a drop of water from a puddle and place it on a glass slide.
Observe it under a microscope. What do you see?
Try this.
When a drop of water from a puddle is seen under a
microscope, innumerable microbes can be seen moving about in it.
You will see the continuously moving amoeba. The paramoecium
is also a unicellular animal like the amoeba.
A horse, a bear, a tortoise are multicellular animals.
UpCan you tell ?
1. What is the chain of bones in the centre of our back
called ?
Animals with a vertebral column and those without
it form two groups known as the vertebrates and
invertebrates, respectively.
Snakes, birds, fish and kangaroos as also humans are
vertebrate animals. Animals such as snails, cockroaches,
earthworms do not have a vertebral column and therefore
they are invertebrate animals.
2. Name some animals which lay eggs and others which
give birth to their young ones.
We have learnt that producing another living thing like
oneself is called reproduction. A hen lays eggs and hatches
them. After a few days, the young chicks hatch out of the
eggs. A cow gives birth to a calf. Before that, the calf
grows within the cow's body. According to the mode of
reproduction, animals are classified into two types, namely,
oviparous animals which lay eggs and viviparous animals
which give birth to their young ones.
3. Where are the animals, namely, a horse, a bear, a tortoise, an alligator, a fish,
a deer and a frog to be found ?
According to their habitat, animals are usually classified into
terrestrial and aquatic animals. However, animals like a frog,
salamander, toad live in both places, namely, land and water.
Therefore, they are called amphibious animals.
A kite, an eagle, a crow, a butterfly, a honeybee all fly in the air, though they live in
difference places. These animals are said to have an aerial mode of life.
What are the different criteria used to classify
Use your brain power!) animals ?
(24)
Always remember...
What we have learnt-
In the living world, a lot of diversity
is seen both in animals and plants.
Every plant and animal is unique. We
should all make efforts to conserve
this diversity in the living world.
• Plants are classified on the basis of their
height and the shape of stems, period of
life cycle and habitat.
Animals are classified on the basis of the
cell structure, vertebral column, method
of reproduction and habitat.
Exercise
1. Match the pairs.
A Group B Group
(a) Amphibian (1) A Monkey
(b) Vertebrate (2) A Snake
(c) With scales (3) A Frog
2. Who is the odd one out?
(a) Fungus, mushroom, chrysanthemum,
spirogyra
(b) Mango, banyan, palm, chick pea
(c) Grape, orange, lemon, hibiscus
(d) Sunflower, banyan, jowar, bajra
(e) Guava, radish, carrot, beetroot
(f) Deer, fish, man, worms
3. What is the difference ?
(a) Flowering plants – non-flowering
plants
(b) A tree – a shrub
(c) Vertebrates – invertebrates
4. True or false ?
(a) The snail is an aquatic animal.
(b) Amphibians can live in air and in
water.
(c) The function of the brain is well
developed in vertebrate animals.
(s) The amoeba is a multicellular
animal.
5. Write two names of each.
(a) A flowering plant
(b) A non-flowering plant
(c) A tree
(d) A shrub
(e) A creeper
(f) An annual plant
(g) A biennial plant
(h) A perennial plant
6. Write answers to the following.
(a) What are the parts of a plant ?
(b) What are the functions of the root ?
(c) Why is it necessary to classify living
things?
(d) What are the criteria used to classify
living things ?
(e) Tell some characteristics of
creepers.
(f) Explain the characteristics of herbs
with two examples.
(g) On the basis of which criteria will
you classify plants and animals ?
(h) What protects the bodies of animals?
7. Draw figures.
Draw the figure of a plant to show the
parts, namely, the root, stem and leaves
in it.
(Activity :
• Visit a plant nursery and classify the
plants there.
Visit a zoo and obtain information
about the diversity in animals.
Write an essay on diversity in plants.
• Collect seeds of various plants
during summer and throw them in
open spaces (fallow land, moorland,
hill, etc.) during the rainy season.
5
4.
Disaster Management
Can you tell ?
1. What events do you see
in these pictures ?
2. What would you have
done in these situations ?
3. Have you experienced
such a situation
yourself ?
4. Why do these events
occur?
Disaster
4.1 : Some disastrous events
• In 1993, many people died due to the
earthquake at Killari in Latur district.
• Even today people of Mumbai shudder
at the memory of July 2005 when many
people had lost their lives in the deluge
caused by heavy rains.
4.2 : Effects of the earthquake at Killari
• In July 2014, the whole village of Malin
in Ambegaon taluka of Pune district was
destroyed in a matter of minutes due to a
landslide. Many got buried under the heaps
of soil and stone and lost their lives.
• In November 2015, many people died
due to the flooding caused by heavy rains
in Tamil Nadu.
4.4: The disaster at Malin village
Use your brain power!
What is a 'disaster'?
A sudden event that causes large scale
damage to life, property and social
aspects of a nation or society is called
a distaster.
1. What disasters can occur in school
or on the way to school?
2. According to you, what can be done
to deal with such a disaster ?
(26
How and why do the following
Classify the following disasters
disasters occur?
as man-made or natural : Fire,
1. Floods due to heavy rains.
earthquake, leakage of chemical
2. An earthquake, lightning, a volcanic gases, storms, floods, tsunami, bomb
eruption, etc.
explosion, collapse of a building, war,
3. Forest fires
forest fire.
4. Increased risk due to high density of Man-made Natural disasters
population in a limited area.
disasters
5. Rampant and irregular constructions.
Fire | Earthquake
6. Ecological imbalance.
7. Terrorism, riots and crimes resulting
in bomb explosions, assaults, fire and
accidents, etc.
Disasters are of two main kinds –
man-made and natural.
Effects of earthquake
Earthquakes
• Destruction of infrastructure, i.e.,
Movements in the interior of the earth buildings, bridges, roads, railway
release tremendous amounts of energy. This
tracks, etc.
causes seismic waves leading to movements • Change in the direction of the flow of
of the earth's surface like tremors, shaking, rivers.
cracking up, etc.
• Huge loss of life and property.
Such vibrations or quaking in the earth's
crust is known as an earthquake. It is believed
that besides other causes, man-made causes
like mining and construction of big dams can
also lead to earthquakes.
Floods
A frequently occuring natural disaster in all parts of the world is 'floods'. Due to
excessive rains in the same place, a river overflows its banks causing a flood. The
water drainage system in big cities falls short when there is heavy rainfall, resulting in
choking of gutters and drainage lines. Water overflows on to the roads and surrounding
areas and even enters nearby
houses.
Effects of floods
• Huge loss to life and property.
• Soil erosion.
Destruction of standing crops.
After - effects of floods,
like spread of diseases and
epidemics affecting the health
of the people.
4.4 : A flood
27
Storms
The formation of high and low air
pressure belts in the atmosphere causes
changes in weather resulting in strong
winds or storms.
Effects of storms
• Great damage in the storm affected region.
• Tremendous losses to life and property.
• Disruption of electric supply.
• Disruption of transport and communication.
4.5 : A storm
Forest fires
A forest fire is an uncontrolled fire in a
forest, pasture or grassland due to natural or
man-made causes. Forest fires spread at a
tremendous speed.
Effects of forest fires
• Great damage to natural wealth and
biodiversity.
• Pollution of air.
4.6 : A forest fire
1. How many children are there in your class at present ?
Can you tell ?
2. What would happen if five times this number sat in your class ?
3. Which kind of disaster can occur in an extremely crowded
place?
Disaster management
Community participation and disaster management are closely related. Taking
steps to prevent disasters, making plans to face disasters and developing the
capacity for that, is called disaster management.
To prevent or reduce damage caused by natural or man-made disasters, emergency
planning and management is required.
Institutes at work
W
e
Always remember... )
The National Disaster Management
Authority was established in 2005.
It undertakes planning and
implementation of disaster
management work.
During a disaster, helping and
supporting each other is our moral
responsibility.
Contact them for disaster management
Police : 100, Fire Brigade : 101, Ambulance : 102, Disaster management cell : 108
28
NEWS MOTOWE OUT...
Remedial and preventive measures
Let us see what precautions we can take before or in the event of a natural or
man-made disaster.
1. Keep watching TV and radio news and
bulletins.
2. Use battery operated radios and mobiles.
3. Heed the warnings issued by the
Meteorological Department carefully.
4. Use the website www.imd.gov.in
5. Landslides occur in hilly areas due to a cloudburst or
heavy rains. On such occasions, do not take shelter at
www.imd.gov.in
the foot of a hill.
6. During floods, do not linger in houses or areas on river
banks. Seek shelter in other safe places. Move to safer
places at a greater height. Do not step into the water
currents or drive a vehicle into them.
7. During an earthquake, roads split open, the ground
cracks, railway tracks get uprooted. Hence, when
moving from one place to another, ensure that the road
is safe further on.
| O |
O
8. Take shelter in relief camps as they provide medicines,
food packets, drinking water, first aid, etc.
9. To get protection from fire, use fire extinguishers in
public places like schools, hospitals, railway stations,
etc.
4.7 : Remedial and
preventive measures
First aid
In day-to-day life, sometimes, we have to face disasters or accidents of varying
proportions. On such occasions, it is necessary to give some immediate aid even
before medical treatment becomes available.
4.8 : Bleeding
1. External bleeding
If a person is bleeding, first make him sit or lie down
comfortably. Keep the bleeding part of the body above
the level of the heart and clean it with water.
2. Burns and scalds
Minor burns
• The injured part should
be washed with water or
held under water.
Give the victim water to
drink.
• Clean the wounds using a
cotton swab soaked in an
antiseptic solution.
• Do not apply oily
ointments.
Cover wounds using dry
dressings.
Serious burns
• Give emotional support.
• Cover the wounds with sterilised
cloth.
• Remove jewellery, shoes, etc. if
easily possible
• Do not touch or burst the blisters
on the skin.
• Do not apply oily ointments.
• Do not try to remove the cloth if it
is stuck to the burnt skin.
If the patient is conscious, give
water to drink but avoid tea or
coffee or other stimulating drinks.
• Get medical aid at once.
4.9 : Immediate steps for burns
3. Sunstroke
When we work in the sun continuously for
a long time, the body loses a lot of water and
minerals. That is the reason for sunstroke.
Remedial measures
• Take the patient to a cool place or
in the shade.
• Sponge the whole body with cold water.
• Place a cloth soaked in cold water on the neck.
• Give plenty of water or liquids like sherbets to drink.
• If the patient feels like vomiting make him lie prone,
i.e., on his/her abdomen with the head turned to one
side.
4.10 : First aid for sunstroke
• Get medical help or shift the patient to a hospital.
4. Snakebite
There are nearly 2000 species of snakes. Of these, only a few, like cobras, kraits,
vipers and sea snakes are poisonous. Therefore, all snakebites are not fatal. However, fear
causes severe psychological shock which can result in death. If you come across a snake,
contact a “Sarpa-mitra' rather than killing the snake at once.
Remedial measures
4.11:
• Wash the wound with water
First aid
• Give emotional support to the patient.
for
• Tie a cloth tightly above the wound.
snakebite
• Get immediate medical help.
(30
5. Dog bite
In a dog bite, there is a risk of
infection through the blood, hence
first aid and medical help are
necessary.
Remedial measures
• Wash the wound with a solution of potassium
permanganate or other antiseptic.
• Cover the wound with a clean and dry cloth.
Get a doctor's help and an injection of the anti
rabies vaccine.
What we have learnt-
• A sudden calamity is known as a 'disaster'.
Disasters can be man-made or natural.
• Alertness and immediate action are necessary on such occasions.
• Effective disaster management and use of remedial measures can
help reduce the losses.
• Every person should know about safety precautions and first aid.
Page 26 :
Photographs of
Killari earthquake
and Malin
landslide -
Courtesy :
Lokmat Library,
| Aurangabad
Exercise
1. What are the emergency contact
numbers of the following ?
(a) Police Control Room
(b) Fire brigade
(c) Ambulance
(d) National level single emergency
number for disaster relief.
2. What first aid will you provide in
the following situations ?
(a) Dog bite
(b) Scratches/ bleeding
(c) Burns/scalds
(d) Snakebite
(e) Sunstroke
3. Write the causes of the following:
(a) Floods
(b) Forest fires
(c) Land slides/building collapse
(d) Storms
(e) Earthquakes
Answer the following questions.
(a) What is meant by 'disasters'?
(b) What are the types of disasters?
(c) What is meant by “disaster
management'?
(d) Which are the main components of
disaster management ?
5. Find out about the work of a
‘Sarpa-mitra'.
6. Find out what a first aid kit/box
contains.
7. Suggest remedial measures for dealing
with natural or man-made disasters.
Disaster Remedy Disaster Remedy
Fire
Earthquake
Building
Deluge
collapse
Road
Storm
accident
Flood
Tsunami
Drought
Bomb
Landslide
explosion
(Activity :)
• Compile information about measures
taken for disaster management in
your school.
• Make posters, advertisements,
banners about disaster management.
• Find out the people/organisations that
provide aid during a disaster. Obtain
their phone numbers, addresses, etc.
War
5.
Substances in the Surroundings – Their States and Properties
Can you recall ?
Name the solid, liquid and gaseous states of water.
Change of state of substances
Pieces of
wax
Let's try this.
Melting wax
Take pieces of wax in a bowl and heat
them on a candle or spirit lamp.
1. How do the pieces of wax change?
2. What was the initial state of wax ?
3. What did it get converted into ?
Now keep the same bowl in cold
water. What happens ?
Spirit lamp
Wax in the
solid state
When a substance changes from one
state to another, the process is called
change of state of the substance.
5.1 : Change of state of wax
Can you tell ?
Read this list of substances : Spirit,
camphor, petrol, ghee, coconut oil,
naphthalene balls, ammonium chloride
(navsagar).
1. Which ones freeze in winter ?
2. Which liquid have you seen change
into a vapour?
3. Which solids directly change into the
gaseous state ?
5.2 : Various substances
What do we learn from this?
The state of a substance changes if
it is heated or cooled. Every
substance in our surroundings,
is found in either the solid, liquid,
or gaseous state.
In the past...
In the 19th century, the scientist
J. Willard Gibbs showed that the
characteristic properties of a substance
depend on its physical state and the
arrangement of particles in it.
(32)
| Points
Solids
Liquids
Gases
Example LA piece of iron
Water, spirit, oil
Air
Shape Has a shape of its own. Does not have a shape of Does not have a shape
Retains shape, no its own. Takes the shape of its own. Occupies all
matter how it is kept. of the container.
the available space.
Volume Has a definite volume. It has a specific volume. Does not have a definite
Solids like sugar, sand Occu
of a container. Spreads on on
when poured on a flat
changing the
| a flat surface on pouring. pressure on a gas in a
surface, form a heap.
Flows downwards along a closed container, its
slope.
volume also changes.
Heat and change of physical state
You have learnt that change in the
physical state of a substance is an effect
of the amount of heat in it. On gaining
heat the substance changes from solid
to liquid and liquid to gas. On the other
hand, when the substance cools, or loses
heat, it changes from gaseous to liquid
and liquid to solid state.
Changes of state
on heating on heating
Solid 2 Liquid = Gas
on cooling on cooling
Can you tell ?
50
120-
100
The temperature and
a thermometer
When a substance gets heat, it
becomes warm and then hot. We
put our hand or finger in the water
to judge how hot it is, but that is not
an accurate measure. Besides, if the
substance is very hot, we could get
scalded.
A thermometer is used to
measure temperature. Degrees
Celsius (°C) is the unit of measuring
temperature. There are several
types of thermometers available.
Nowadays digital thermometers are
frequently used.
Does water change into
vapour the moment we place
the vessel on a stove ? Does
water kept in fridge change
at once into ice ?
A specific amount of
heat must be gained or lost
before the state of a substance
can change. The change in
physical state is determined
by how hot the substance
becomes on gaining heat, or
how cold, on losing it.
How do we tell how hot or
cold a substance is ?
.
..
l
l
Il
Mercury
368TC
5.3 : Thermometer
33.
Let's try this.
Take a thermometer from the laboratory. The bulb at
Thermometer
its lower end is filled with mercury. The mercury rises to
a certain level in the capillary tube above the bulb. You
will see a scale next to the mercury column. Reading
the figure near the level of the mercury tells us the
temperature of air around the bulb of the thermometer.
Hold the thermometer in water so that the bulb
Ice
is completely immersed in the water and read the
temperature of the water. Repeat the activity taking
some hot water in one vessel, and cold water or ice in
another. Note the temperatures.
5.4 : Recording the temperature
Some examples
Temperature
Boiling water
100 °C
Freezing water
0 °C
Air (winter night) <15 °C
Air (summer afternoon) >35 °C
Inside a fridge
<5 °C
Inside the freezer <-18 °C
Body temperature Approx. 37 °C ( Do be careful !
100°C
Thermometer
Boiling
Water is continuously evaporating. We know that
water spilled on the floor dries up slowly on its own.
This evaporation occurs from the surface of the water.
What happens when water boils? As the water
gets heated, its temperature increases and it evaporates
at a faster and faster rate.
When water kept on a stove attains a particular
temperature or level of heat, then evaporation takes
place in all parts of the body of water. Then we see
water bubbles rising at faster and faster rates to the
surface and steam mixing in the air. This is called
boiling of water or ebullition. At sea-level, pure water
boils at 100°C. This is the boiling point of water. When
water vapour cools, it is converted into water again.
This process is called condensation. Condensation of
steam also takes place at 100°C. It means that the
boiling point and condensation point of water are one
and the same.
( 34
Boiling
water
50°C
Burner
20°C
5.5 : Boiling
Let's try this.
While gaining heat
Boiling
Melting
Gas
Vapour
Liquid
Solid
Take some water in a beaker and
place a thermometer in it. Heat the beaker
on a spirit lamp. Note the boiling point of
water. Repeat the activity, adding salt or
sugar to the water and note the boiling
point again. What do you infer from it?
Condensation
Freezing
While losing heat
Use your brain power!
The chart given below shows the
boiling point and freezing point of
some substances. State whether these
substances are solid, liquid or gaseous
at room temperature.
Freezing
The water kept in a fridge or on
ice becomes cooler and cooler, that
is, its temperature falls. At a certain
temperature, water does not get any
cooler, but starts freezing and forms ice.
The temperature at which this happens, is
called the freezing point of water.
The temperature of a substance can
fall below 0°C, e.g., the temperature of air
in the freezer of a refrigerator is around
-18°C. It is read as 'minus 18 degrees
Celsius'.
When ice gets heat, it starts melting
or changing into the liquid state again. Ice
melts at 0°C. It means that the freezing
point and melting point of water are one
and the same.
Each substance has a specific boiling
point which is also its condensation point.
Each substance has a specific
melting point which is the same as its
freezing point.
Substance Freezing point | Boiling point
Candle 60°C
350°C
Plastic >250°C
954°C
Iron 1535°C 2862°C
to
Various uses of changes in physical
state
1. Candles are made by melting paraffin
wax.
2. Solid carbon dioxide (dry ice) is used
to make ice cream and to keep it
frozen.
3. Liguid nitrogen is used in animal
husbandry.
4. Sand (silica) is melted to make glass.
5. Metals like gold and silver are melted
to make ornaments.
6. Iron is melted to make tools.
The temperature at which
a substance boils while heating
is the same as the temperature at
which it condenses when it is cooled.
Similarly, the temperature at which
a substance freezes while cooling
is the same as the temperature at
which it melts when it is heated.
35
Y Let's try this.
Take some sand in a crucible. Put a few iodine crystals on it.
Place the crucible on a tripod to heat it. Block the stem of the
funnel with a cotton plug and place it inverted over the crucible. Light the burner and
heat the mixture in the crucible. Observe the changes.
Why does this happen?
R- Cotton plug
Sublimation
Iodine crystals do not melt on
heating but change directly to the
Iodine
gaseous state. When the fumes of
particles
iodine hit the walls of the funnel they
— Funnel Actual particles of
cool to form solid crystals of iodine
iodine seen during the
experiment in the
and stick to the funnel walls. Thus,
laboratory
on heating, iodine does not melt and
change to a liquid but directly changes
Burner
to the gaseous state.
The change of a solid substance
directly into a gas or vapour without
5.6 : Sublimation
first changing into a liquid is called
sublimation.
Use your brain power !
On opening a box of camphor, its smell spreads all around.
Why does this happen? |
Can you tell ?
How will you identify the following?
• A glass : Is it made of plastic, steel or
glass?
• A rod : Iron or aluminium ?
• A door : Wooden or glass ?
• A white powder : Salt or chalk powder ?
To answer the above questions, you
considered their properties, e.g., their
transparency, hardness, weight colour,
the sound produced from it, solubility in
water, etc. Substances can be identified
by studying their properties. They can be
put to use according to their properties.
Let's study the properties of
substances in greater detail.
5.7 : Identifying various substances and objects
36
Properties of substances.
Let's try this.
or
5.8 : Brittleness
5.9 : Hardness
What will happen if pressure is applied on
substances like chalk, brick, alum, glass or a
rajgira wadi ? These substances break into small
pieces or particles. Such substances are said to
be brittle. This property of substances is called
brittleness.
Take an iron nail. Try to pierce a cardboard
sheet, wet mud and a piece of wood using the
nail. What happens ? The nail easily pierces wet
mud, but not the piece of wood. It can pierce
the cardboard sheet with some effort. Why does
this happen? The hardness of a substance is
determined by how much resistance it offers to
the substances being pushed through it.
Which is the hardest known substance ?
• Stretch a rubber band and let it go or apply
pressure on a piece of sponge and release it.
What do you see? The rubber band and the
sponge go back to their original shape. Some
substances change their shape when a force
is applied on them but return to their original
shape and size when the force is removed. This
property is called elasticity.
Take a flat metal sheet of the size of a notebook.
Holding it at an angle, put a drop of water,
honey and gum at different places on the board.
Observe how they flow down the slope. Liquids
flow downward on a sloping surface. This
property is called fluidity. The fluidity of any
liquid is determined by how easily it flows.
5.10 : Elasticity
5.11 : Fluidity
If two blocks of the same size, one wooden and the other of iron, are weighed in
a balance, how would they compare ? The mass of different substances having the
same volume can be different. This difference is because of the difference in their
densities. Between substances of the same volume, the ones with greater density are
heavier than the those of lesser density.
(37)
Kerosene
Water
• Take a glass of water. Add some salt, fine
sand and sugar to it and try to dissolve
them. Repeat this, replacing water with
kerosene. What do you observe ? Some solid
substances dissolve in a particular liquid. If
a solid does not dissolve in a liquid, it is
said to be insoluble in that liquid e.g. salt is
soluble in water, but insoluble in kerosene.
You know of many beverages, made by
using water and soluble substances. The
property of a substance of getting dissolved,
is called its solubility.
• When we can look through a substance and see
things on the other side, then that substance
is said to be transparent. This property of
the substance is called transparency. Glass,
some types of plastic, clean water and air
are transparent substances.
5.12 : Solubility
Una Can you tell ?
5.13 : Transparency
Identify the objects shown in figure 5.14.
From which substances are they made ? What
are these substances called as a group ?
Metals : Substances like copper, gold, iron,
aluminium are called metals. Metals are found
in the form of minerals deep inside the earth.
Minerals from the earth's crust are processed
to obtain the metal. In daily life, metals have
various important uses. Let us study some
common properties of metals.
Properties of metals
5.14 : Metals
-
Let's try this.
Take a piece of copper or aluminium wire or
a small nail. Hammer it repeatedly. What do
you observe ?
On hammering repeatedly, the wire
becomes flat, i.e., it forms a thin sheet. Metals
can be converted into sheets by hammering.
This property of metals is called malleability.
5.15 : Malleability
( 38
Observe and discuss.
Hot iron is hammered and made into thin
sheets. Visit a blacksmith's shop to observe how this
hammering causes it to stretch. Iron bars made to
revolve continuously while being hammered become
longer. The iron can be drawn into a wire.
Metals can be stretched and drawn into wires. This
property of metals is called ductility. Metals like silver,
5.16 : Ductility
gold, copper, platinum can be drawn into fine wires.
1. Why are the electric boards fitted on the wall made of plastic
Can you tell ?
or wood ?
2. The handle of a cooker is made of plastic. Why?
Electricity flows through metals. All metals are
conductors of electricity to a greater or lesser extent.
This property is called electrical conductivity.
Even when a piece of a metal is heated at
one place, the whole of it becomes hot. It shows
that metals allow heat to flow through them. This
property is called thermal conductivity.
Metals have a typical shine or lustre. Every
metal has a characteristic colour by which it can
be identified.
Try this.
5.17 : Thermal conductivity
1. Pluck the string of a musical instrument like
a tanpura or veena, ring a bell or hit a steel
box with a metal spoon.
2. Strike a wooden table or a marble floor
with a wooden stick.
Note the difference in the sounds
produced in the two cases.
Metals produce a ringing sound. This
property is called the sonority of metals.
5.18 : Uses of metals
What we have learnt-
P
T Always remember...)
During the rainy season or at
any other time, do not touch the
exposed electric wires or metal
parts.
Keep all electric lamps or other
appliances switched off when not
in use. For example, even when
the TV is switched off by remote
control, do not forget to put off
the main switch. It helps to save
electricity besides protecting us
from any possible danger.
Ask your seniors at home to
check the electric wiring and
fittings in the house periodically.
| • Solids, liquids and gases are the three
states of substances.
• The temperature of a substance, (how
hot or cold it is), can be measured with
the help of a thermometer.
• Heat is the cause of the change of state
of substances.
• Substances have various properties like
hardness, elasticity, brittleness, fluidity,
density, solubility and transparency.
• Metals form a separate group of
substances.
• Metals have some common properties
like malleability, ductility, thermal
conductivity, electrical conductivity,
sonority, lustre, and characteristic
colour.
Science watch ...
Science is developing continuously. How much do we know of it ? Research work
goes on at the State, national and global level. If we wish to keep ourselves informed
about it, we must be aware of the various happenings around us. Make newspapers
your friends, read newspapers daily. Read and collect articles on science. Discuss
and share them with others.
राष्ट्रीय विज्ञान दिनानिमित्त विविध उपक्रम
थोर शास्त्रज्ञ सी. व्ही. रामन यांच्या
सन्मानार्थ देशात विज्ञान दिन साजरा केला
विज्ञानाने जी प्रगती आहे त्यामुळे सामान्य
- बदलून गेले
पुणे, दि. २७ (प्रतिनिधी)
सावित्रीबाई फुले पणे
विद्यापीठातर्फे यंदाही
होणान्या राष्ट्रीय विज्ञान
करण्यात येणार आहे.
द्यापीठाच्या विति
साख्यान, पोस्टर
DEAR GRAVITY, WE HEAR YOU NON
India's imprint in landmark LIGO project
वैज्ञानिक समुदायाच्या या पर
प्रत्यक्ष पाहिल्या आणि हाकाल व्या
गुरुत्वीय लहरी शिवी कधी
विज्ञान तंत्रज्ञानाच
भरारी
कधी संपणारा
विज्ञानाबद्दल
अनास्थाट
With this find
welbee
गुभा
thy 'It's all about extracting
wave signal from noise
मा अपना नाम दिया की
Pr
वाचा या मोहिमेत
महत्वाचे म्हणजे यास
सहलेखनात ३५ भार
आयुका, पुणे या संर
आहे.
विकाhroom
प्रत्यक्ष पाहि
तंत्रज्ञानाच्या प्रमा
पटनेने पग मात्र
न आणि
तुदी झाले. या
दिनेहेgugrat. poranphe
wnोन्नति
(40)
Exercise
1. In the paragraph below, write “solid',
‘liquid' or 'gas’ in each of the brackets
depending on the substance referred
to just before.
On a bright sunny day, Riya and Gargi
are playing with a ball ( )
in the park. Gargi feels thirsty. So,
Riya brings tender coconut water
( ) for her. At the same time, a
strong breeze ( ) starts blowing
and it also begins to rain ( ).
They run back into the house ( ),
change their clothes ( ) and then
their mother gives them a cup ( )
of hot milk (
) to drink.
2. Discuss.
(a) Riya pours some water from her
bottle into another bottle. Does it
change the shape of the water ?
(b) Halima picks up a small stone
from the ground and puts it in the
water in a dish. Does the shape of
the stone change?
3. Write the properties of these
substances.
Water, glass, chalk, iron ball, sugar,
salt, flour, coal, soil, pen, ink, soap.
6 What will happen if....? And why?
(a) Nails are made of plastic.
(b) A bell is made of wood.
(c) Rubber is not fitted on a pair of
tongs.
(d) A knife is made of wood.
(e) An axe is made of rubber.
7. Who am I?
(a) I'm found in a thermometer, I
measure your temperature.
(b) I make things hot or cold.
(c) I have no shape whatsoever !
(d) I dissolve in water, but not in
kerosene.
8. Why does this happen?
(a) Coconut oil thickens in winter.
(b) Kerosene left open in a dish
disappears.
(c) The fragrance of incense sticks
lighted in one corner of a room
spreads to the other corner.
(d) What you see in the picture.
4. What is sublimation ? Write the
names of everyday substances that
sublimate.
(Activity : )
5. What is it made from? Why?
(a) A sickle to cut sugarcane.
(b) The sheets used for roofing.
(c) A screwdriver
(d) A pair of tongs.
(e) Electric cables.
(f) Ornaments.
(g) Pots and pans.
Find out how the big statues
of wax are made.
Visit a jeweller's shop and
find out how ornaments are
made.
41
6.
Substances in Daily Use
Can you recall ?
1. Which three objects
do you see in the
picture ?
2. How did you identify
them ?
3. What material are
they made of ?
4. Can any one of these
materials be used to
make all the three
objects?
6.1 : Different objects
OYO Try this.
Make a list of various objects
in your house and note down the
substances they are made of.
Substances and objects
All substances are made up of very small
particles. Objects are made up of substances.
Objects have a specific shape, their parts have a
specific arrangement, by which we identify them.
We use wood, plastic or steel, to make a table,
chair or cupboard. These substances have the
strength required to make these articles. Also, these
substances can be given a desired shape. It means
that we consider the properties of substances to
use them for making things.
The same substance or material can be used
to make many objects. Let us study some such
examples.
Cotton – cloth, fibre or thread, sarees,
handkerchiefs, quilts, mattresses, pillows, etc.
Iron – construction steel bars, griddles,
(tawa), parts of automobiles, electric poles, tables,
cupboards, etc.
Aluminium-kitchen utensils, electrical cables,
etc.
By studying the properties of substances, we
can select substances suitable for our purposes.
The substances in everyday use are of two main
kinds – natural and man-made substances.
Classify.
Classify the following
substances according to
their uses.
Substances - sand, soap,
wool, window glass,
bamboo, cotton, bricks,
silk, leafy vegetables,
cement, fruits, water, sugar.
AT Use your brain power!)
Make a list of objects, each of
which can be made from
several substances.
( 42
Can you tell ?
1. What is the difference between
these two groups of natural
substances – leather, jute, wool,
cotton and water, soil, metals.
Natural substances
Substances available in nature
are called natural substances. Of
these, the substances of the first
group are obtained from living things.
Substances obtained from living
things are called biotic substances.
Air, soil, water are substances that
are not obtained from living things.
They are called abiotic substances.
2. How are leather and wool different
from jute and cotton ?
Leather and wool are obtained
from animals. They are of animal
origin, whereas jute and cotton are
substances of plant origin.
3. Do we find plastic, nylon, brass
or cement in nature ?
Man-made substances
It is human nature to strive for
newer things and to try to make
life more comfortable. As a result
of his efforts, man not only learnt
to use natural substances but also
began to process them to make new
substances. Several such substances
are easier to use and can be made
available in plenty at a low cost.
Therefore, these substances came
to be used on a large scale. There
are a great many such man-made
substances in use today.
New substances produced by
processing naturally available
substances are called man-made
substances.
43
CI
Classify.
Classify the various substances
available in the house as natural
and man-made substances.
Examples of man-made substances
Earlier irlis or capes made of grass
or sackcloth were used for protection from
rain. Then cloth umbrellas came into use.
Nowadays, the raincoat, school bags and
the book covers you use can all be made
from plastic.
Delicate articles, perishable fruits,
etc. require packing. To pack TV sets,
refrigerators, etc. big cartons and thermocol
are being used. All these are man-made
substances. These substances are water
proof or water resistant, lightweight and
easy to transport. That is why, they are
being used increasingly.
Use your brain power!)
Complete the table below, showing
how substances of daily use are
classified.
Substances in daily use
Natural Man-made
Area of use
substances substances
Construction Bamboo,
k, cement
stone, soil, concrete,
wood, galvanized
coconut sheets, clay
fronds, lime tiles, plastic/
asbestos sheets
Writing Tree bark, Pens, pencils
material leaves, made from
bhurjpatre, plastic and
pens made metal, paper,
from reeds, notebook, etc.
dhulpatya,
stone slates,
stone walls
in caves,
soil and
colours
made from
plants
Threads / Cotton, silk, | Nylon, rayon
Fibre / Yarn wool
Man-made
Abiotic
| Plant origin
Leather
Glass can be made from sand and calcium carbonate. However, sand and
calcium carbonate cannot be obtained again from glass.
You must have observed green chillies or tomatoes turning red after some time.
Have you ever seen or heard of red tomatoes becoming green again?
While making man-made substances, the properties of the constituents undergo
a change. This change occurs due to certain chemical reactions. These changes
in the properties are permanent, that is, the original constituent substances cannot
be obtained again from the new substances. Such changes are called irreversible
changes.
( 44
Production of substances
Rubber
Rubber is of two types, natural and
artificial.
Natural rubber is obtained from the
gum or sap of trees. This sap is called
‘latex’ Rubber has a peculiar odour
and it is white in colour.
Vulcanization of rubber
In this process, rubber is heated with
sulphur for three to four hours. To give
hardness to the rubber, sulphur is mixed
in it. The proportion of sulphur in the
mixture is determined by the purpose for
which the rubber will be used.
Erasers, rubber balls, rubber toys all
have varying proportions of sulphur in
them. In rubber bands, the proportion of
sulphur is very small.
In the past...
Charles Goodyear
spilled a mixture of
rubber and sulphur on
a burning stove. After the
stove was extinguished,
he noticed that the rubber
had become harder and
less elastic. He repeated
this experiment in a
systematic way and
invented the process of
‘vulcanization'. Hard
and tough tyres of rubber
made thenceforth brought
about a revolutionary
change in transportation.
Do you know?
Rubber is a natural substance obtained by collecting
the latex of a certain tree. Rubber trees are found in
abundance in Brazil. Later, these trees were planted in
other countries too. The botanical name of this tree is
‘Hevea brasiliensis'. In India, the maximum production
of rubber is in Kerala.
Manufacturing paper
Adding dyes
Logs of
wood
Paper
Pressing the pulp
with rollers
Peeling the
logs
(De-barking the
logs)
Pulp
Trees
6.2 : The process of manufacturing paper
Winding the
paper on reels
( 45
Paper
Paper is the substance or material formed due
to the intertwining of the cellulose fibres in grass,
wood, rags or waste paper. Thus, paper is a kind
of network of cellulose fibres.
How is paper made ?
Coniferous trees like pine are used to make
paper. The bark of the logs of these trees is first
removed and the wood is broken into small pieces.
The mixture of these pieces and some chemicals
is kept soaking for a long time. It helps to form
pulp. When the chemical process is completed, the
fibrous substances from wood pulp are separated,
and some dyes are added. The pulp is then passed
through rollers, dried to form paper and finally
wound on reels.
Paper and wood are closely related. To save
trees, it is necessary to use paper sparingly.
Always remember...
1. Do not tear up blank pages
to
of a notebook. Do not throw
away old notebooks with
blank pages.
2. The blank sides of advertising
pamphlets, inner side of postal
envelopes, the blank sides of
of calendars pages and other
such writable surfaces can be
used to make notes, lists, to
cover books, etc. Do not throw
away or burn up such paper
until it has been fully utilized
like this.
3. Whenever possible, try to use
a pencil and slate.
4. Cooperate with people who
collect paper from garbage or
buy scrap paper. These people
help in the proper recycling of
resources.
Do you know ?
)
In India, the first factory to manufacture
newsprint (paper to be used for newspapers)
was established at Nepanagar in Madhya
Pradesh in 1955. Paper is also manufactured at
Songardh in Gujarat. In Maharashtra, there is
| a paper factory at Ballarpur near Chandrapur.
Find out.
1. Where was the process of
making paper invented ?
2. What kind of paper is used for
our textbooks. What size is it?
3. How is paper for currency
notes manufactured ?
Synthetic fibres or threads
Can you tell ?
1. From which substances in nature can we get
threads or fibre?
2. What are clothes made from?
From the time it was first thought that
artificial yarn could be produced to meet the
clothing needs of an increasing population,
much research and progress has taken place
in this field. Innumerable kinds of synthetic
or artificial threads are now available. Nylon,
dacron, terylene, terene, polyester, rayon are
the names of various synthetic threads.
Do you know?
Silk is a natural thread or fibre
obtained from the
cocoons of silk
worms. From one
cocoon, 500 metres to
1300 metres of thread
can be obtained. It
is said that silk was first produced
on a large scale in China.
( 46
Almost all the articles made from natural fibres
in the olden days can now be made from synthetic
threads.
Nylon, rayon, terylene, acrylic are all synthetic
threads and many articles in our daily use are made
from them.
Nylon
These threads were invented at the same time in
New York and London. Therefore the initials NY of
New York and LON from London were combined
to name them NYLON. Nylon threads have a shine
and are strong, transparent and water resistant. They
are used to manufacture clothes, fishing nets, ropes,
etc.
.3: Artificial threads
Rayon
Cotton and wood pulp is dissolved in a
chemical called sodium hydroxide to make
a solution. Threads are obtained from this
solution with the help of machines. As these
threads have shine and strength, they are
said to be ‘synthetic silk'. They appeared
to be shining bright like the sun's rays.
Hence they were named “Rayon’.
Dacron, Terylene, Terene
Various hydrocarbons obtained from
mineral oils are used to make polymer
chains. A solution of such a polymer is
pressed through a strainer with fine holes.
The fibres formed after cooling, are long
and unbroken threads. These threads are
twisted to obtain yarn.
Different types of chemicals are used
to make threads of various properties.
These different threads have been named
variously as dacron, terylene, terene, etc.
New words
1. Hydrocarbons : Substances obtained
from mineral oil.
2. Polymer chains : Long continuous
chains formed by small, interlinked
chemical units.
6.4 : Uses of artificial threads
47
Advantages and Shortcomings of Synthetic Fibre
Advantages
1. These fibres can be manufactured
on a mass scale.
2. They cost less.
3. They are strong and durable.
4. They can be used for a long time.
5. They are water repellant, hence, do
not rot or get wet. They dry easily.
6. They are lightweight and comfortable
to wear.
7. As they have a shine, they enhance
the appearance of the wearer.
8. Clothes made from these threads are
wrinkle-free and scratch-free.
Shortcomings
1. They are water repellant. Hence, do
not absorb sweat from the skin.
2. Continuous use of clothes made
from these threads keep the skin
moist, which may cause skin
diseases.
3. Synthetic clothes are uncomfortable
to wear especially in summer.
4. Synthetic fabric catches fire easily.
5. If they catch fire, the cloth sticks to
the skin and causes serious injuries.
6. These fibres are not decomposed by
micro-organisms.
WAVE Always remember...
What we have learnt-
Save trees to save nature; save paper
to save trees. Use paper properly
and economically. Make full use of
it and recycle the used paper.
Although there are some
disadvantages in using synthetic
fibres, they can be useful if they
are used in the proper way. They
reduce the load on the use of natural
resources.
We use two types of materials –
natural and man-made. Natural
materials may be biotic or abiotic.
Biotic materials are either of plant
origin or animal origin.
Rubber, paper and synthetic fibres
are important man-made materials
in our daily use.
Man-made materials are obtained
by using certain processes.
Science watch ...
While studying science, we do verify whatever we learn, but what about
others ? It is necessary to explain to everybody that there is science behind every
phenomenon. Let us explain to them what we have learnt and let us act on the
basis of our knowledge.
(48
Exercise
1. Fill in the blanks using proper
words.
(a) Rubber made by vulcanization is
a ...... material.
(b) Man-made materials are made
by .......... natural materials.
(c) ............. thread was developed
simultaneously in New York and
London.
(d) Rayon is also known as ............
5. Give scientific reasons.
(a) We must use cotton clothes in
summer.
(b) We must observe economy in the
use of materials.
(c) Saving paper is the need of the
hour.
(d) Man-made materials have more
demand.
(e) Humus is a natural material.
6.
Find out.
(1) How is lac obtained from nature ?
(2) How are pearls obtained ?
( Activity
2. Answer the following questions.
(a) Why did the need for man-made
materials arise ?
(b) Which are the natural materials
obtained from plants and
animals ?
(c) What is vulcanization ?
(d) Which natural materials are used
to obtain fibres ?
3. What are we used for?
(a) Soil
(b) Wood
(c) Nylon
(d) Paper
(e) Rubber
Visit a rubber, paper or textile
industry in your area and collect
information about it.
Collect various samples of paper
and note their uses.
Use blank pages from old
note-books and make a new one.
4. How is paper manufactured ?
Write in your own words.
Nutrition and Diet
Can you recall ?
Which are the various groups of foodstuffs ? Name the
ones you see in the pictures. Which main constituents of
food do we get from them ?
7.1 : Foodstuffs
Living things take food and water and use them for
a variety of purposes such as :
• Obtaining energy • Growth of the body
• To carry out day to day functions of the body
. To fight diseases
Nutrients and foodstuffs
There are six main nutrients in our food:Carbohydrates,
fats, proteins, fibre, vitamins and minerals. These nutrients
are present in the different food items we eat in differing
proportions. Let us learn more about some of them.
Energy-giving nutrients – Carbohydrates
Our main need is of energy. It is fulfilled
by carbohydrates. Hence, our diet includes
a large proportion of cereals in the form of
rice, chapatti or roti, bhakri and bread which
contain carbohydrates. Cereals are our staple
food.
In living things, the
process of taking in
food and water and
using it for growth
and other purposes is
called 'nutrition, and
the constituents of food
useful for these purposes
are called 'nutrients".
7.2: Cereals
Fats
Some part of our energy requirement is also
fulfilled by fatty foods such as oil, ghee and butter.
We get energy in the form of heat from the food
we eat. Heat is measured in kilocalories. Hence, the
energy in food items is also measured in kilocalories
(Calories).
Children of growing age need to get approximately
2000 to 2500 Calories from the food they eat.
7.3 : Fatty foods
(50)
Proteins
We need proteins for the
purposes of growth, repairing
the wear and tear of the body
and for other life processes. We
get proteins from the sprouts,
milk and milk products, meat
and eggs in our food.
Minerals and vitamins
7.4 : Proteins
To improve the body's resistance to disease and for other life processes the body
needs vitamins, minerals and fibre in the diet. We obtain these nutrients mainly from
vegetables and fruits.
We require vitamins and minerals in small quantities, but their deficiency can lead
to various diseases. Let us learn more about them.
The body needs several inorganic substances. They are called minerals. The table
below gives examples of some minerals and provides information about their functions
in the body, the various sources of the minerals as well as the diseases caused by
their deficiency.
Mineral
Functions
Sources Deficiency Diseases
Iron
Carrying oxygen to all Meat, spinach,
parts of the body.
apples, raisins
Calcium and Strengthen bones and teeth. I Milk and milk Bad teeth, brittle and
phosphorous
products. Green weak bones.
leafy vegetables,
meat.
Iodine Controls growth, speeds up Raisins, beans, Goitre
chemical reactions in the fish, sea food
body.
Sodium and Maintains the body's water Salt, cheese, Inefficiency of muscles
potassium balance and functioning of leafy vegetables,
the muscles and the fruits, pulses
nervous system
Vitamins
Water soluble vitamins :
Vitamin B and Vitamin C dissolve Water insoluble vitamins : These
easily in water. So they are called water
vitamins are insoluble in water but are
soluble vitamins. They are thrown out soluble in fatty substances. They get
of the body through the water in sweat stored in the body. Vitamins A, D, E
and urine. Hence, a regular supply of and K are fat soluble vitamins.
these vitamins is essential.
B,, B2, B3, B6, B, and B12 are the
important types of Vitamin B.
51
Vitamin
Vitamins – Sources and functions
Helps in Sources Deficiency
Diseases
Protects eyes. Carrot, milk, Night blindness
Helps to keep skin, butter, dark green (inability to see
bones and teeth vegetables, sweet in dim light),
healthy.
potatoes, deep yellow | Xeroderma (dry
fruits and vegetables skin)
B12
Helps in proper Milk, fish, meat, Beriberi
functions of nerves cereals, nuts, pulses (Nerve disorder),
and heart.
Muscle weakness/
inefficiency
Growth of the Deep green
Improper growth,
body.
vegetables, papayas, anaemia,
kiwis
forgetfulness,
slow movements
Formation of red Meat, milk products | | Anaemia
blood cells.
Protects body | Amla, kiwi, oranges Scurvy (bleeding
tissues; formation | and other citrus | of gums), thyroid
of collagen – a fruits, cabbage, malfunction,
protein essential tomatoes, green leafy delay in healing of
for gums, teeth, vegetables.
wounds.
bones and skin.
Absorbs calcium On exposure to | Rickets (softening
and phosphorous sunlight vitamin D is of the bones,
for healthy bones made in the human causing pain and
and teeth.
body from some | fractures)
substances in milk,
fish, eggs and butter
Smooth
Wheat germ, green Weak muscles,
functioning of leafy vegetables, obstruction in
Metabolism
tender leaves, reproduction, skin
inside the cells, vegetable oils
disorders
reproduction,
maintaining
efficiency of
muscle cells.
Helps in clotting of Green leafy
Excessive bleeding
blood.
vegetables, green after an injury
cabbage, broccoli,
sprouted pulses,
yellow of eggs
Group activity : The information in the above chart should
be enacted through role play.
K
7.5 : Vitamins
UTENI Always remember...)
Some vitamins are very sensitive to heat and light. For example, Vitamin C is easily
destroyed during cooking. Therefore, Vitamin C rich foods should be eaten raw.
(52
Scurvy
In the past.....
Casimir Funk was a
scientist who belonged to
Poland in Europe. In a
scientific article, he read
that people who ate brown
rice were less likely to get
beriberi than those who ate
fully milled rice.
He was able to identify
and isolate the substance
which prevents this disease.
He named it ‘vitamine'.
He also proposed that
other disorders like scurvy,
pellagra and rickets were
also caused by a deficiency
of various vitamins.
Probiotics
You know that the useful
micro-organisms which convert
milk into yoghurt are present in
yoghurt and in buttermilk. They
are called 'probiotics’. Lakhs of
micro-organisms reside in our
intestines. Their presence in such
large numbers is essential for our
health. Hence to maintain them
in our body, we should include
probiotics such as yoghurt and
buttermilk in our daily diet.
When we suffer from loose
motions and vomiting, we throw
out micro-organisms along with
intestinal water. Some medicines
can also kill them. Therefore, we
need to take extra yoghurt/
buttermilk to restore their
numbers.
Rickets
Goitre
A balanced diet
All that we consume during the
day is together called our “diet'. A
diet containing adequate quantities
of all nutrients is called a Balanced
Diet.
Fatty substances
(oil, ghee, butter)
Milk products, meat,
fish, eggs
To build a strong and healthy
body, you need all nutrients in the
right proportion and in sufficient
quantities in your daily diet.
Significance of a balanced diet:
Fruits and
vegetables
Cereals
and
pulses
• An increased capacity to work.
• Good physical and mental health.
• Increased capacity to fight/resist
diseases.
• Helps in proper growth of the body.
7.6 : The balanced diet pyramid
Apart from having a balanced diet,
we also need to exercise regularly to
keep ourselves fit and healthy.
53
8
Always remember...
How to get a balanced diet ?
To ensure that we get a balanced diet from
the food we eat, we can make a food pyramid.
All food which we eat is classified into various
groups. The space allotted to each food group in
the pyramid, depends upon the proportion in which
it should be included in our diet. Hence, we can
choose foods from each group daily according to
the space allotted to it in the pyramid.
If we choose some items from each group in the
right proportion according to the pyramid shown on
page 53, we can make sure that we are getting a
balanced diet.
Fibre
If we select a daily diet which includes
vegetables, fruits, sprouts and cereals according
to the pyramid, we will also get fibre in sufficient
quantity.
If our need for nutrients
is met through the food
we eat, the nutrients
are better utilised in
our body. Hence, the
best way to good health
is taking a balanced
diet and avoiding
the deficiency of any
nutrient.
Can you recall ?
What trouble do we have to face if we do not get
enough fibre from our daily diet ?
What care must be taken to make sure that fibre
is not lost or removed from the food we eat?
Water
Alongwith all the other nutrients, the body
also needs an adequate supply of water. For this
purpose, we must drink milk, buttermilk, lemon
juice, sherbets, fruit juices and plenty of water.
Malnutrition
Malnutrition occurs when all the nutrients
that the body needs are not obtained in the proper
proportions from the diet. This happens when a
person does not get sufficient food or when the
diet is not balanced. If one's diet exceeds one's
need, it is called overnutrition.
Use your brain power!
Choose a balanced diet for one day
according to your preferences.
7.7 : Malnutrition and overnutrition
( 54
How to avoid obesity ?
Have a balanced diet.
• Eat whole grains. Eat fruits
and vegetables with their
skins.
• Increase use of bicycles
• Play more outdoor games
Junk food
Chocolates, noodles, burgers, pizzas, chips,
bottled soft drinks, attractively packaged snacks
as also ready fried foodstuffs available in the
market such as wadas, pakodas, etc. are very
tasty and we like them very much. However,
these foodstuffs contain refined flour, sugar,
oil in large proportions. When refined flour,
is made from wheat or when sugar is made
from sugarcane, many nutrients in the wheat
or sugarcane are lost in the process. Hence,
all we get from these foods is energy and our
hunger is satisfied.
Naturally, if we eat a lot of junk foods,
we will get insufficient quantities of the
items from other food groups. If this happens
frequently, our body soon experiences a
shortage of proteins, vitamins and minerals
and that may lead to malnutrition.
Junk food eaten frequently also causes
obesity. Obesity is not good for our health.
As such foods do not supply all the
necessary nutrients, they are called junk foods.
• Do not eat if you are not
hungry.
• Do not watch TV while
eating.
• Do not use motor vehicles for
travelling a short distance.
• Avoid precooked, packaged
foods.
Food Items
Adulterants
Adulteration of food
In order to earn more profits, cheaper
substances of low quality are mixed with
the foodstuffs. These substances are called
adulterants and adding them to foodstuffs
is called adulteration of food. Adulterants
may even be poisonous or harmful to
health. Such adulterated food is impure
and harmful and so unfit for consumption.
Adulterants
Adulterants used to adulterate food are
such that they will remain unnoticed even
when mixed with the food.
• Milk Water, chemicals like
urea, starch
• Chilli
Brick powder,
powder powdered pumpkin
• Pepper corns Papaya seeds
• Ice-cream Washing soda,
paper pulp
• Rice Small white stones
• Peanuts Reddish pebbles/stones
Always remember....
Adulteration of food is a crime. Do not eat adulterated foods.
55
What we have learnt-
nutrients in the right quantities.
• The food pyramid helps us to choose a
Nutrition is the process of taking food balanced diet.
| and water and using them to obtain . Whether a person is malnourished or has
energy, and for the purposes of growth deficiency diseases depends upon the
and other bodily functions.
proportions of food taken.
A diet containing all nutrients in the . I
the • Junk food gives us energy but not other
right quantity is called a balanced diet.
Carbohydrates, fats, proteins, vitamins, . Adulterated food is impure and harmful to
minerals and fibre are the nutrients health
in food. A balanced diet includes all
1 r
Exercise
1. Fill in the blanks.
(a) The process of intake of food and
utilising it for all life processes is
called ...........
(b) All the substances in our food
which are useful for various bodily
processes are called ...........
(c) Carbohydrates and .......... provide
.......... to our body.
(d) In a balanced diet, all the nutrients
are present in the ....... proportion.
(e) In the food pyramid, cereals are
given the maximum space because
they fulfil our .......... requirement.
(f) Intake of more food than necessary
causes ...........
Spot the following in the table of
vitamins and minerals.
(a) The nutrient present in citrous
fruits.
(b) Vitamins / minerals present in milk.
(c) Causes and symptoms of night
blindness, scurvy, rickets, beriberi.
(d) Foods required to prevent the above
diseases.
(e) Causes of anaemia.
(f) Essential mineral for healthy bones
and teeth.
(g) Sensory organ affected due to the
deficiency of Vitamin A.
3. Choose the correct alternative.
(a) Pulses are a very good source
of ...........
(1) carbohydrates (2) proteins
(3) fats (4) minerals
(b) .......... provide maximum energy
to the body.
(1) Cereals (2) Leafy vegetables
(3) Water (4) Amla
(c) Goitre is caused by a deficiency of
the mineral ..........
(1) iron (2) calcium
(3) iodine (4) potassium
(d) .......... is a type of junk food.
(1) Orange (2) Milk
(3) Bhakri (4) Chocolate
4. Use the food pyramid to select food
items of your choice for three days.
Conditions:
(1) The diet for all three days should
be balanced.
(2) There should be variety in the
items chosen for the three days.
Activity :
• Obtain information on simple
methods of spotting the
adulteration in foodstuffs and
try them out.
8.
Our Skeletal System and the Skin
Can you recall ?
Which organ systems
do you see in the figure
alongside ?
In the previous
classes, we have learnt
about some organ systems,
their functions and their
locations in our body. With
the help of that, complete
the following table.
8.1 : Organ systems and the human skeleton
Function of ||
the organ
Body
cavity
Name of
the organ
Heart
Lungs
Intestines
Brain
The various organs are safe
within the body cavity. The
human skeleton is a protective
shell for all the internal organs.
Sometimes when we fall while
playing or have an accident, a bone in
our arm or leg may get broken. This is
called a “fracture of the bone.
A fracture in a bone causes severe
and unbearable pain and the part with the
broken bone swells immediately.
Can you tell ?
Your friend meets with an accident and
a bone in his leg is fractured. How will
8.2: A boy with a fractured bone
you help?
After an accident, prevent any movement of the fractured part. Immobilize it and
get immediate medical help. After going to the hospital, an X-ray’ image is taken of
the part which is swollen.
X-rays' were discovered by Wilhelm Conrad Roentgen.
(57)
Plaster
A fractured
bone
8.3 : An X-ray image
An X-ray image shows whether a bone is broken
and also the exact spot where it is broken. This helps in
providing the proper treatment.
Let's try this.
Types of Bones : Bones of our body
are classified into four types.
1. Flat bones
Let's identify our bones.
(1) Place your hand at the centre of
your chest and your friend's back.
(2) What is the name of the hard part
you feel on placing your hand on
your chest ?
(3) Do you feel some hard bumps on
the back? What are they called ?
(4) What difference do you notice
between the bones of the back and
those of the chest ?
2. Small bones
3. Irregular bones
The human skeletal system
All the bones in our body are not of
the same shape. Every bone is different.
All the bones together form a framework
or skeleton. The skeleton gives a shape
to the body.
All the bones of the body along
with cartilage together form the skeletal
system.
Bones are hard. They are not flexible.
Bones are composed of two main
constituents. Bone cells are biotic, while
calcium carbonate, calcium phosphate,
minerals and salts are the abiotic
constituents of bones. Calcium imparts
strength to the bones.
4. Long bones
The system which gives a definite shape to the body, provides support and
protects the delicate organs inside the body is the skeletal system.
( 58
Can you tell ?
Can you identify the animals from
skeletons ?
the pictures of their
8.4 : Skeletons of various animals
Skull
Try this.
Take a measuring tape and measure the
length of the bones of your arms and
legs. Do the same for your friend/ sister/
brother. Record the measurements in the
table below and compare them.
Rib cage
Bones
Length of bones in cm.
Self Friend Brother Sister
Spine
Arm
1. Arm
bones
2. Leg
bones
The human skeletal system can be
divided into two parts : the axial skeleton
and the appendicular skeleton.
The axial skeleton consists of the
skull, the spine and the rib cage. These
are situated symmetrically along the
central vertical axis of the body.
The appendicular skeleton is made
up of the bones of the upper and lower
limbs (arms and legs) on either side of
the central axis.
+
Leg
8.5 : Parts of the human skeletal system
( 59
As our body grows, the size and length of our bones increases. Such changes
in size and length can be seen in children according to age. However, the body
continues to grow only up to a certain limit. The bones of taller people are longer.
The axial skeleton
Skull : The skull is formed by the bones of the head
and face. The bones of the skull are flat and strong. There
Skull/
are altogether 22 bones in the skull, 8 in the head and 14
Cranium
in the face. Except for the lower jaw, none of the bones
of the skull can move.
Lower jaw/
Mandible
Which organs of our body does the skull protect ?
Rib cage : Feel the left and right sides of your chest
Rib cage
with your hand or finger. How many bones can you feel
altogether on the two sides ?
Check in the centre. How many bones do you feel ?
The cage-like structure in the chest is calld the rib
cage. In the chest, there is one vertical, flat bone called
the sternum. Twelve pairs of flat bones called ribs are
joined to it sideways. These 25 bones form the rib cage.
It is joined to the spine at the back.
The Spine (Backbone or Vertebral Column) : The
spine is formed by padlock-shaped bones placed straight
one above the other. There are altogether 33 bones in the
spine, each called a vertebra. These bones are arranged
one above the other flexibly. The spine protects the spinal
cord that originates from the brain.
Back bone/
Vertebral
What would have happened if we didn't have a
column
backbone ?
Vertebrae
The appendicular skeleton
The human body has two arms and two legs. The
different parts of the arms and legs have several bones,
which are connected together by joints.
8.6 : Skull, rib cage and spinal column
Do you know?
There are three bones in each of the ears.
Of these, the stirrup is the smallest bone in our
body. It is as small as a grain of rice and is
hollow. Its shape is like that of a stirrup.
In the human body, the longest and strongest
bone is the thigh bone or the femur.
Stirrup
(60)
Observe and discuss.
Observe a human skeleton in your school laboratory or a picture of the skeleton
and classify the bones in our body into four types. Discuss the functions of these bones.
Try this.
Move the different parts of your body
from the head to the toes and observe the
different places at which they can bend
or turn.
The bones in our body are connected to
each other by means of ligaments.
Joints : Joints are the places
where two or more than
two bones are connected to each
other. Joints are of two types.
Joints
Movable Joint
Bones can move.
Examples : bones
of arms and legs
Immovable Joint
Bones cannot move.
Example : bones of
the skull.
(Other than the lower
jaw)
Hinge joint
Types of joints
Let us study some types of movable
joints.
1. Hinge joint : This type of joint
allows the movements of bones only in
one direction. It moves in a 180° angle.
Examples : the elbow and knee joints.
Ball and
socket
joint
Gliding
joint
2. Ball and socket joint : In this
type of joint, the bones can move in two
or more directions – in a 360° angle.
Examples : shoulder and hip joints.
3. Gliding joint : In this type of
joint, the bones can only slide over each
other. Examples : wrist and ankle joints.
8.7 : Some types of joints
61
Can you recall ?
Which organ helps us to sense whether
something is hot or cold, rough or
smooth, etc. ?
The skin
The skin is an important and large
organ of all living things. The skin has
hair. There are nails on the skin at the
tips of the fingers and toes. The skin
gives us the sense of touch. The skin is
an important sensory organ of the body.
Functions of the skin
1. Protecting the internal parts of the
body like muscles, bones,
organ systems, etc.
2. Help preserve the moisture
in the body.
3. Synthesizing vitamin ‘D'.
4. Releasing sweat to regulate
body temperature.
5. Giving protection from
the heat and cold.
6. The skin functions as
the sensory organ of touch.
Epidermis
Dermis
The outermost covering of the
body is called skin.
The structure of the skin
Human skin is made up of two main
layers. The outermost layer is called the
epidermis and the layer below it is called
the dermis. Below the dermis, there is a
network of blood vessels and nerve fibres.
The subcutaneous layer under this network
maintains normal body temperature. The
epidermis has various layers.
Subcutis
(Hypodermis)
8.8 : Structure of the skin
Can you tell ?
Melanin
A pigment called melanin is present
in the cells of the epidermis. The
melanin is synthesized in certain
glands in the skin. The percentage
of melanin decides the fairness or
darkness of the skin. The colour of
the skin also depends on the climate.
Melanin protects our skin and the
inner parts from ultraviolet sunrays.
What happens when we walk or play in
the hot sun ?
When we walk or play in the sun, we
get tired, but at the same time our skin
becomes wet. This is because of sweat.
In the skin, there are glands which secrete
sweat. They are called sweat glands.
After playing in the hot sun or after
hard physical labour, the temperature of
the body rises. Then sweat is released.
It helps to reduce the temperature of
the body. Our body temperature usually
remains constant at approximately 37°C.
Use your brain power!
1. Which colour of the skin will give
greater protection from the sun's
rays ?
2. How does sweating help to lower
the temperature of the body ?
( 62
Observe and discuss.
Observe your skin and the skin of your
grandmother, grandfather or any old
people in the house.
What difference do you notice ?
As we grow older, the proportion of
fat beneath the skin reduces. However,
the previously taut skin does not shrink.
This causes wrinkles on the skin of older
people.
Do you know?
It is melanin that determines the
colour of our hair, too. Jet black hair
is due to pure melanin, while brown,
lighter hair is due to sulphur in the
melanin and reddish hair, due to iron
in the melanin.
y Always remember...
For the health of our skin, it is
important to keep it clean.
Discriminating between people
based on their skin colour is
unscientific and wrong. Avoid the
temptation of using artificial means
to become fair.
What we have learnt-
All the bones in the body along with the cartilage together form the
skeletal system.
The skeleton gives shape and support to the body.
• The outer covering of the body is called the skin.
• The skeletal system and the skin perform the important function of
protecting the body and the internal body parts.
• We must take care of our skeletal system and skin.
The skull, the rib cage, the backbone and the bones of the arms and
legs are the main parts of the human skeletal system.
• Epidermis and dermis are the two main layers of the human skin.
63
Exercise
1. Fill in the blanks with the proper
word.
(a) The place where two or more bones
are connected is called a ...............
(b) Cells of the epidermis contain a
pigment called ...............
................ and ...
are the two layers of the human
skin.
(d) The human skeletal system is
divided into ...................... parts.
(c)
5. Answer the following questions in
your words.
(a) What are the functions of your
skin ?
(b) What should you do to keep your
bones strong and healthy ?
(c) What are the functions of the
human skeletal system?
(d) Which are the various reasons due
to which our bones might break ?
(e) What are the different types of
bones ? How many types are there?
'B'
6. What will happen if – ?
(a) There are no joints in our body.
(b) There is no melanin pigment in our
skin.
(c) Instead of 33 vertebrae in our body,
we had one single and straight
bone.
7. Draw diagrams.
(a) Types of joints
(b) Structure of the skin
2. Match the pairs.
‘A’
(1) Ball and socket joint (a) Knee
(2) Hinge joint (b) Wrist
(3) Gliding joint (c) Shoulder
3. Right or wrong? If wrong, write the
correct sentence.
(a) Bones are soft.
(b) The human skeleton protects the
internal organs.
4. Put a 7 mark at the proper places.
(a) The system which gives a definite
shape to our body.
Excretory system
Respiratory system
Skeletal system
Circulatory system
(b) The ................ joint is seen in
fingers and toes.
Hinge joint
Ball and socket joint
Immovable joint
Gliding joint
(Activity :
Collect pictures of the different
parts of the human skeletal
system and paste them on chart
paper. Write the functions of
each, too.
Collect the pictures, newspaper
cuttings, etc. which show the
skeletal systems of various
animals and observe the
differences between them.
64
9.
Motion and Types of Motion
Observe and discuss.
9.1 : Objects in motion-
In our day-to-day life, we see many moving objects. Moving objects are said to
be objects in motion. Discuss which objects in the above pictures are in motion. What
differences are seen in their motion ?
Motion
While waiting for a bus at a bus-stop, other
vehicles appear to be in a state of motion. On the
other hand, when you are in motion yourself, a
still object appears to be moving. For example,
the trees are seen to run backward while you
are travelling in a train. If an object is seen by
an observer to change its place continuously,
the object is said to be in motion. Change
of place of an object is called displacement.
9.2 : Backward motion of object
An object in motion continuously undergoes
displacement.
The continuous displacement of an object is called motion.
Types of
motion
1. Linear motion
9.3 : Linear motion
A train or a moving vehicle on a road may travel in a straight line or
in the same direction. This motion of an object is called linear motion. An
object in linear motion shows displacement along a straight line.
If you stand on a chair and release a ball from your hand, it falls to
the floor. What do you conclude from this?
2
65.
Compare the motion of soldiers on parade and a girl coming down a slide.
The motion of soldiers in a
parade is the same. During that
period, not even a slight difference
is seen. However, the motion of
the girl coming down the slide
does not appear to be uniform. The
girl comes down faster and faster.
The speed of her motion goes on
increasing continuously.
The motion of the marching
soldiers is ‘uniform linear motion',
because in this motion no change
is seen. On the other hand, the
motion of the girl coming down
the slide is ‘non-uniform linear
motion’.
These are the two main types
of linear motion.
ODIO
9.4 : Comparing linear motion
Uniform linear motion
| Non-uniform linear motion
When the distance traversed by an When the distance traversed by an
object along a straight line in unit time is object along a straight line in unit time
continuously the same, the motion is called keeps on changing, the motion is called
uniform linear motion.
non-uniform linear motion.
2. Non-linear motion : The motion of an object that does not move in a straight
line is called “non-linear motion’. Non-linear motion may be of the following types.
What kind of movement does a swing in a
Can you tell ?
park show ?
The swing always comes back from
one end to the other end. It takes about the
same time for each swing or oscillation.
This movement of a swing is called
oscillatory motion. Similarly, the
movement of the pendulum of a clock, the
wings of a bird, the needle of a sewing
machine, the vibrating diaphragm of a
tabla or drum are also examples of
oscillatory motion.
9.5 : Oscillatory motion
66
The motion of a body that is oscillating, i.e.,
swinging back and forth, is called
oscillatory motion.
Use your brain power!
In which musical instruments can
you see oscillatory motion ?
Observe and discuss.
9.6 : Examples of non-linear motion
The motion of an object along a
circular path is called circular motion.
The motion of an object which passes
through a certain point again and
again after a fixed period is called
periodic motion.
Use your brain power!
The hands of a clock move in a
circular manner. Similarly, a fan, a giant
wheel, and a merry-go-round complete
each round along a circular route. In our
day-to-day life we come across many
examples of objects that trace a circular
path.
Which other examples of circular
motion can you give ?
We see from these examples of
oscillatory motion and circular motion
that some objects complete one round
or one oscillation in a fixed period of
time. For example, the minute hand of
a clock completes one round in exactly
60 minutes every time, while a merry-
go-round also completes every round in
the same period of time. Such motion is
called periodic motion.
Which types of motion are seen when
a girl rides a bicycle as shown here ?
67.
Don
9.7 : Children playing in a garden
Oye Can you tell ?
While chasing a butterfly in a garden, do you run along a
definite path or in the same direction all the time ? Not really.
| A butterfly constantly flits from one flower to another.
There is no definite direction to its motion. Such motion is
called random motion.
The motion
that changes its
direction and
speed continually
is called random
motion.
The motion of the players in a game of football is also of this type. The motion of a
crawling baby or a wandering animal is also random motion.
The distance traversed by an object in unit
time is called the speed of that object.
Speed
A bus covers the distance of
about two hundred kilometres
from Solapur to Pune in five
hours. How much distance does
the bus cover in one hour ?
While solving this example,
we take the ratio of the distance
traversed and the time required to
traverse that distance.
From this ratio, we come to
know the distance traversed by
the bus in one unit of time.
Distance traversed
Speed = -
Time required for traversing the distance
Unit of speed : kilometre/hour, metre/second
SMA
Always remember...
A moving object may not have only
one type of motion.
What we have learnt-
• Objects in motion are those that change their position continuously.
The various types of motion are linear, uniform linear, non-uniform linear,
oscillatory, circular, periodic and random motion.
• The distance traversed by an object in unit time is called its speed.
• The time required to traverse a certain distance depends on the speed of the object.
( 68
Exercise
1. Identify the types of motion.
(a) Movement of the earth around the
sun : ...........
(b) Movement of a ceiling fan : ..........
(c) A meteor falling from the sky :
4. Explain in your own words, giving
one example each.
(a) Linear motion
(b) Oscillatory motion
(c) Circular motion
(d) Random motion
(e) Periodic motion
..........
.......
5
(d) A rocket launched from the
ground:
(e) A fish swimming in water : ..........
(f) The plucked string of a sitar : .......
2. Fill in the blanks.
(a) If a ball is released from the
terrace of a building, it comes
down in ........... motion. On the
other hand, it reaches the ground in
........... motion if it is thrown with
force away from the terrace in a
direction parallel to the terrace.
(b) The motion of an aeroplane on the
runway before take-off is...........
(c) The kite looking for its prey flies
with .......... motion in the sky.
(d) Children sitting in a rotating giant
wheel have ........... motion, while
those sitting in a merry-go-round
have a ........... motion.
(Linear, non-linear, circular,
uniform linear, non-uniform linear,
uniform circular, non-uniform
circular, random)
Answer the following questions in
your own words.
(a) Which types of motion are seen
in birds flying in the sky ?
(b) Write in detail about your
experience of various types of
motion while riding a bicycle on
a road.
Complete the puzzle using words for
types of motion :
(1) a spring is stretched and one end is
released
(2) a minute hand
(3) a see saw
(4-5) children in a march past
(6) a stone rolling down a hillside.
6.
Activity :
3. How are we different ?
(a) Oscillatory motion and linear
motion.
(b) Linear motion and random
motion.
(c) Random motion and oscillatory
motion.
Make a list of various moving objects
in the environment, and discuss the
types of motion seen in them.
10.
Force and Types of Force
Observe and discuss.
10.1 : Various actions
1. Will a boat move ahead unless pushed with the help of an oar?
2. Who exerts force to move a bullock-cart forward ?
3. What makes the ball move during a game of football ? How does its direction
change?
4. Will the wheel go forward if it is not pushed with a stick ?
When we kick the football coming in our direction, towards the goal, we apply force. In
day-to-day life, we do many actions such as lifting, pulling, riding a bicycle and stopping
it at times, pushing a load, squeezing or bending something and driving vehicles. It is
necessary to apply force for doing all these actions. Force is applied to an object to pull it
or push it in any manner.
No object changes its position on its own. Force is required to move an object.
Force is used to change the direction of an object in motion, or to stop it.
Can you tell ?
1. What happens when you hold the two ends of a
spring and pull them apart ?
2. What happens when a blacksmith hammers a red
hot piece of iron?
Force is necessary to change the shape an object. 10.2: Changing the shape of on object
70
Types of force
1. Muscular force
In all the actions shown in the picture 10.1, the movements
take place with the help of the bones and muscles in the body.
The person in the picture alongside is lifting the weight by using
muscular force.
The force applied with the help of muscles is called muscular force.
Use your brain power!
10.3 : Lifting a weight
For which tasks in your day-to-day life do you use
muscular force ?
2. Mechanical force
We use different machines for doing many tasks.
Muscular force is used for running some machines.
Some machines are run by using electricity or
fuel. Machines like the latter are called “automatic
machines’, because a mechanical force is used
here. For example, sewing machine, electric pump,
washing machine, mixer, etc. Make a list of other
such machines.
10.4 : Machines
The force applied by means of a machine
is called mechanical force.
3. Gravitational force
If an object is thrown upward by applying force,
it reaches a certain height and comes down again.
Why is this so?
Why do fruits on trees fall to the ground?
The earth pulls all the objects towards itself.
oos soos
D
The force applied by the earth to pull objects
towards itself is called gravitational force.
10.5 : Falling down of a ball and a mango
In the past ...
Sir Isaac Newton discovered gravitation in the 17th
century. The earth's gravitational force acts in a direction
opposite to that of an object moving upwards. Hence, the speed
of that object goes on decreasing till in the end it becomes
zero. Then the object starts falling down instead of going up
any further. While falling, its speed goes on increasing all the
time due to gravitational force.
71
10.6 : Dropping a stone in water
FYLet's try this.
1. Take a small stone and a bucketful of water.
Drop the stone into the water from a height of
about 20 cm. You will hear the sound of the stone
dropping in the water. Now drop the same stone
into the water from a height of about 100 cm. You
will hear its sound again.
What is the difference in the sounds in the two
actions above ? What can we conclude from this ?
2. The actions of lifting a sack are shown in the
picture. One sack looks empty, the other one is full.
What difference do you notice in the way the two
sacks are lifted ?
The gravitational force on the empty sack is
less, that is to say, it weighs less.
The gravitational force on the bigger sack is
greater. In other words the bag weighs more.
Greater force must be applied to lift a
greater weight.
10.7 : Carrying a load
Do you know ? )
To weigh an object, it is hung from the
/ Find out and discuss.
hook of a spring balance.
The suspended object is pulled downwards
The gravitational force operates
by the force of gravity. At the same time, between the sun and the planets in the
the force of the tension in the spring solar system. Because of this, the planets
constantly pulls the object upwards.
revolve around the sun. At the same time,
The object comes to rest when the tension
gravity also operates between planets and
in the spring and the gravitational force on
their satellites. Then, why don't all the
the object become equal. In this position, planets and satellites fall towards the
the scale on the spring balance shows the sun ?
gravitational force acting on the object
"
| which is the weight of the object. The
Use your brain power!
gravitational force acting on an object is
called the weight of that object.
Which forces are acting upon an
aeroplane taking off into the sky ?
4. Magnetic force
Place a magnet on a table. Take a big iron nail towards the magnet. It sticks to the
magnet. Now hold the magnet upright in the air, away from the nail. What happens ?
TUP
The force exerted by a magnet is called magnetic force.
(72)
5. Frictional force
When a carrom piece is flicked lightly,
it slides over the carrom board, but stops at
a certain distance.
A ball rolling over a flat ground
stops at a certain distance. Why does this
happen?
When two surfaces rub against each
other, the force of friction comes into play.
It always acts against the direction of
motion.
When a brake is applied while riding
a bicycle, it stops after running a short
distance. How does the brake work?
Between which parts is friction produced ?
10.8: Frictional force
Use your brain power!
Why is powder sprinkled on the
carrom board while playing carrom ?
100
Take two pieces of smooth paper and two of sandpaper and rub
Try this. them against each other. What do you notice ?
The smooth surfaces can be easily rubbed against each
other because the force of friction between them is less,
while rough surfaces cannot be easily rubbed against each
other because the force of friction between them is much
greater.
It is possible for us to walk on the ground only because
of the force of friction. If there is no friction, we would
slip and fall. For example, we are very likely to slip while
walking on an oily or wet floor.
Why is a wooden plank laid down for pulling out a car
which is stuck in mud?
| A force of friction is generated between the wheel and
the wooden plank laid down under the car. Hence, it can be
pulled out from the mud. In short, the force of friction can
either be decreased or increased as desired.
6. Electrostatic force
1. Spread small pieces of paper on a table. Rub a piece of
thermocol or an inflated balloon against silk cloth and
bring it near these pieces.
2. Rub a plastic comb against dry hair and repeat the
above activity.
3. Rub a peacock feather between two pages of a notebook
10.9 : Electrostatic force
and bring it near your fingers. What do you see?
In the above activities, the pieces of paper, hair, and the
peacock feather are seen to move. Why does this happen?
Static electricity is produced on materials like rubber, plastic and ebonite due to friction.
The force exerted by such electrically charged materials is called electrostatic force.
(73)
A little fun!
Combined forces : While an action
is taking place, various types of forces
act on the object in question. You
might have seen a roller coaster or the
juggling of a sail board on the seashore.
A variety of forces act together in these
cases. To obtain more information about
these, type the words “Trick Science in
Google search on the Internet.
Cut out fish shapes from coloured
plastic sheets. Fix a pin on one side
of the fishes. Take water in a big deep
plate. Release the fishes in it. They will
float on the water. Take a magnet and
move it around over the water.
Can you make other games like this?
What makes such games possible ?
What we have learnt-
Force is required to bring about any action. Force is necessary for making an
object move, to change the direction of motion and also to change the shape of
an object.
There are various types of forces such as muscular force, mechanical force,
gravitational force, magnetic force, frictional force and electrostatic force.
•
Exercise
1. Choose the term to fill in the blanks.
(a) ...... has to be applied to change
the ..... of a ...... object.
(moving, direction, force)
(b) When an elephant drags a wooden
log over the land, the forces that
are applied on the log are ...... ,
....... and .........
(muscular force, mechanical force,
gravitational force, frictional
force)
A ball was set rolling on a large
table. If its ...... is to be changed,
a ........ will have to be applied on
2. Match the following:
Group ‘A’ Group 'B'
(i) An ox pulling a cart (a) Magnetic force
(ii) Lifting a heavy iron (b) Electrostatic
object with a crane force
(iii) Weighing with (c) Muscular force
a spring balance
(iv) Applying brakes (d) Gravitational
to a bicycle
force
(v) Picking up pieces (e) Frictional force
of paper with a
plastic scale
it.
(force, motion, gravitation)
(d) The force of friction always acts
........ the motion.
(along, against)
74
3. One or more forces are acting in the
following examples. Name them.
(a) An object falling from a tall
building
(b) An aeroplane flying in sky ....
8. Solve the following crossword puzzle.
(c) Squeezing sugarcane juice with a
squeezer ......
(d) Winnowing foodgrain ........
4. Explain in your own words giving
one example each.
Muscular force, gravitational force,
mechanical force, electrostatic force,
the force of friction and magnetic
force.
Down :
(1) ....... force is to be applied to push a
scooter that has failed.
(2) ........... force can be used to pick up
scattered pins.
5. Why?
(a) Machines are oiled from time to
time.
(b) An object thrown upwards comes
down after reaching a point.
(c) Powder is sprinkled on a carrom
board.
(d) The ramp at a railway station has a
rough surface.
6. In what way are we different?
(a) Muscular force and mechanical
force.
(b) The force of friction and
gravitational force.
7. Write answers to the following
questions in your own words.
(a) What are the things that can be
done by applying force ?
(b) What is meant by weight ?
(c) Which machines run on muscular
force ?
Across :
(1) A .......... pulls an iron nail towards
itself.
(3) .......... force was used when the
farm was ploughed with a tractor.
(4) It is due to the force of ............ that
raindrops fall to the ground.
(Activity :
• Collect more information
about the various forces that
are used in our day-to-day
life.
Make a list of such actions
where many forces are
applied simultaneously.
75
11.
Work and Energy
Observe.
1. What actions are seen in the picture ?
2. Is a force being applied while doing each
action ?
3. In the various actions in the picture, has
the object changed its original position ?
11.1 : Various actions
In the above picture, we see that the position of some of the objects has changed.
That is, these objects are displaced.
When an object is displaced by applying a force on it, work is said to be done.
Work
1. Tie a string to an empty box, as shown in the picture.
2. Pull the box through a distance of 10 metres along a straight
line.
- Try this. 3. Now fill the same box with 20 books.
4. Pull the box again through a distance of 10 metres in a straight
line. What was your experience this time?
5. Now pull this loaded box through a straight distance of
20 metres.
6. When did you feel that more work was done ?
| More work is done for the same
displacement, when more force is applied to
do the work. If the same force is
applied for more displacement,
more work is done by the force.
Use your brain power!)
1. In the above activity, which are the different
forces acting on the box ?
2. Is a displacement possible without a force ?
3. If a force is applied with both the hands on
a wall, will there be a displacement ?
4. If no displacement occurs on applying a
force, what does it indicate ?
11.2 : Pulling a box
76
Let's try this.
Take a pulley. Fix it at a height. Draw a string
over the pulley. Tie a load of two kilograms at one
end. Hold the other end of the string and pull it
downwards to lift the load, first up to a height of
one metre, and then up to a height of four metres.
When is more work done ?
4m
2m
When the applied force is the same,
more work is done when there is greater
displacement. In other words, for
measuring the work, both the force and the
displacement must be considered.
11.3 : Using a pulley
The relationship between work and energy
The boy in the picture has applied a force to
the toy car. Work has been done because the force
applied to the car has caused displacement. In other
words, transformation of the boy's energy into work
has taken place through the applied force.
Run around the ground with your friends. Can
your friends run as many rounds as you can?
Do all the friends have the same capacity for
running?
Your friends will complete either more or less
11.4 : A boy pushing a car
rounds than the number of rounds you complete. The
number of rounds will not be the same. Some will
get tired on completing two rounds, while others will
get tired on completing three or four rounds. That is to say, each one's capacity to
complete rounds is not the same. You can complete only as many rounds as you have
the capacity for. The capacity to do work is called energy.
Use your brain power!)
Do you know?
1. Why do you get hungry after
physical exercise ?
2. From where does our body get
energy?
3. Why do we get tired ?
The units of work and energy are
the same. Work and energy are both
measured in the unit named Joule in
S.I. (System International) units.
Forms of energy
A. Mechanical energy
Can you tell ?
What will happen as a result of the
action in the picture ?
1. The rubber band is released after stretching it.
2. A stone is held in the rubber of a catapult, the
rubber is stretched and released.
In the above examples we see that when the
rubber of a catapult is stretched and released, it
comes back to the original state and the stone flies
off. Similarly, when the spring of a toy is wound
and then released, the toy starts playing. When
water stored at a height is made to fall on a wheel,
the wheel starts rotating. In each of these actions,
displacement takes place, which means that work is
done. From where is the energy obtained to do this
work? The energy which is stored in an object due
to a specific state or position of that object is called
potential energy.
11.5: Potential energy
-
Let's try this.
1. Take two balls. Let one of them stand
stable at the centre of a table.
2. Place the second ball on the table and
push it so that it hits the first ball.
3. What happens when the second ball hits
the first one ?
4. From where did the second ball get the
energy to set the first ball in motion ?
11.6 : Kinetic energy
Can you tell?
1. In the game of marbles, from where does one marble
get energy to set another marble in motion ?
2. While playing carrom, from where does the striker
get the energy to make the pieces move ?
We give energy to the marble or the striker and set
them in motion. The energy obtained from motion is
called kinetic energy.
The energy used for
doing mechanical work
is called mechanical
energy. There are two
types of mechanical
energy, namely,
potential energy and
kinetic energy. Potential
energy is obtained due
to position and kinetic
energy, by motion.
( 78
B. Heat energy
The earth receives heat in proper quantities from
the sun. That is how an atmospheric temperature
favourable to the living world is maintained. Heat is a
form of energy. Sunlight contains heat energy.
Heat is produced by burning of fuel. Heat energy
is used in the kitchen all the time. Heat is measured in
the unit ‘Calorie’.
- Let's try this.
1. Take a convex lens and hold it over a sheet of
paper in sunlight.
2. Now, move the lens in such a way that there is a
tiny spot of light on the paper.
3. Hold the lens in this position for a while. What
11.7 : Heat energy
happens ?
C. Light energy
Collect information.
We have learnt that plants
make their own food with the
help of sunlight. It means that
1. Generally, grapes which appear in the
light energy is transformed into
market during December and January are
the energy in food. Plants and
sour. However, in March-April the grapes
animals use this food for doing
are sweet. Why is this so?
their work. It means that light is a 2. How does a picture appear on the screen of
form of energy.
a TV, mobile, laptop and a cinema theatre ?
D. Sound energy
You might have seen the glass panes of windows crack due to a loud noise.
Similarly, sound is used to control the movements of some toy cars. This means that
some work is done by sound. It tells us that sound is a form of energy
E. Chemical energy
When wood burns, we get
heat and light. Sometimes, we
hear a crackling sound as well.
What makes this happen ? The
energy stored in wood is emitted
in various forms through chemical
action. Also, it is due to the
chemical action in the lead acid
battery that electrical energy is
11. 8 : Chemical energy
produced
The energy obtained through chemical action is called chemical energy.
Use your brain power!)
1. In which form is energy stored in plant food ?
2. How is energy obtained from cooking gas ?
Mechanical energy, heat,
light, sound, chemical and
electrical energy are the
various forms of energy.
Observe and discuss.
Observe the working of the various appliances
we use such as the fan, lamp, mixer, TV, radio,
refrigerator, washing machine, clothes iron. In which
form is energy supplied to them to make them work?
11.9 : Transformation of energy
Transformation of energy
Transformation of energy takes place when work is done. Let us consider one
chain of transformation of energy.
In the course of the water cycle, water evaporates due to the heat of the
sun. This water vapour forms clouds that give rain. Rainwater flows into rivers
and is stored in reservoirs on dams. These are at a height and therefore their
water has potential energy, which is transformed into kinetic energy as the water
falls downwards. When the water falls on the blades of turbine, its kinetic energy
is transferred to the turbine. The turbine rotates producing electrical energy. This
electricity gets transformed into various other forms of energy.
Electrical energy is used in our houses for various purposes. It is transformed
into light energy on lighting a bulb, into kinetic energy on starting a fan, into sound
energy while playing a music system, and into heat energy in an oven.
Thus we see that we are indirectly utilizing nothing but solar energy in all
these transformations of energy. In other words, the sun is the most important
source of all energy.
( 80
Energy resources
The resources used for getting energy can be
classified into two types.
1. Conventional energy resources or
non-renewable energy resources.
The energy resources which man has been using
for centuries are called conventional energy sources.
Conventional energy resources include coal and
fossil fuels such as petrol, diesel and natural gas. We
cannot replenish these resources. Wood also cannot
be replenished easily.
2. Non-conventional energy resources or
renewable energy resources
These resources have not been used traditionally.
They are inexhaustible and continuous and can be
used in various forms again and again.
Due to the increasing
population and
increasing usage of
energy resources, there
is a danger that the
limited reserves of
coal, petrol, diesel,
crude oil and natural
gas will get exhausted.
Therefore, it will be
better to use alternative
and supplementary
resources instead of the
conventional ones.
A. Solar energy: The energy
obtained from the sun is continuous and
enormous. Solar energy is at the root
of all energy available on the earth. A
variety of devices have been developed
for making use of solar energy. For
example, the solar cooker, solar water
heater, solar drier, solar cell, etc.
In the first three devices mentioned
above, heat energy obtained from the sun
is utilized to cook food, heat water and
to dry grain. In a solar cell, electrical
energy can be obtained from solar energy.
Solar electric plants have the capacity to
produce electricity on a large scale. A
solar plant consists of many solar cells.
B. Wind energy : Electricity is
generated by means of windmills using
strong winds. A windmill is also used for
drawing water from a well.
11.10 : Solar energy
11.11 : Wind energy
C. Tidal energy : A wall is constructed at a narrow region of a creek. Due to
waves generated by high and low tides, the turbine of the generator fitted in the wall
starts rotating and electricity is generated.
81
D. Hydroelectric or hydel power :
The water stored in a dam at a height
is brought down through a tunnel and
the turbines of the generator are rotated.
The place where electricity is generated
in this way is called a 'hydroelectric or
hydel power' plant. The Koyna project
in Maharashtra is a well-known hydel
project. There are also other smaller
hydroelectric plants located at other dam
sites.
11.12 : Hydel power
E. Energy obtained from oceanic
waves : While sea waves move forward in
a certain direction, the water moves up and
Use your brain power!)
down regularly at a position. This, too, can
be used to generate electricity.
There is energy in every substance
F. Atomic energy : The serious
in the universe. It is present in
crisis of electricity shortage can be eased
non-living things as well as in
by generating electricity by means of
living things. Why, then is energy
atomic energy. The heat liberated during
not visible to us ?
the fission of atoms of heavy elements
such as uranium, thorium is used to
generate electricity.
Think over it!
Note the amounts of your electricity bills of the last eight months and think about
the consumption of electricity during each month.
What we have learnt-
Energy saving and green energy
In a way, saving energy is as good as
generating energy. There are several
ways of saving energy such as putting
off lamps when not needed, making
maximum use of sunlight, etc. Saving
energy and energy resources is very
necessary. Otherwise, we will have
to face a serious calamity like global
warming
The energy resources which do not
produce smoke and carbon gases such
as carbon dioxide or carbon monoxide
are called “Green energy resources'.
Greater use of such resources is the
need of the hour.
Work is done when an object
undergoes displacement on
application of a force.
Energy is the capacity to do work.
• The various forms of energy are
mechanical energy, heat energy,
light energy, sound energy, chemical
energy and electrical energy.
• Something that can be used to obtain
energy is called an energy resource.
Energy resources are of two kinds:
conventional (non-renewable) and
non-conventional (renewable) energy
resources.
( 82
Exercise
1. Fill in each blank with the appropriate
term from the brackets.
(a) A bucketful of water is to be drawn
from a well. ....... will be done when
a ......... is applied to do this, because
there will be a ........... of water.
(displacement, work, force)
(b) If a ball is dropped on the sloping roof
of a house, it acquires ...... and falls
on the ground. That is, transformation
of ........ energy into .......... energy
takes place.
(kinetic, potential, motion)
(c) You might have seen some beautiful
fireworks during Diwali. It is an
example of transformation of .......
energy into....... energy.
(light, atom, chemical, solar)
(d) The solar cooker is an application of
the ...... energy of the sun, while
solar cells, solar lamps are
applications of the ...... energy of the
sun.
(light, chemical, heat)
(e) One labourer carried four pans of
road metal through a distance of 100
metres. If he carries two pans of road
metal through a 200 metre distance
......... work will be done. (equal,
more, less)
(f) The capacity that an object has for
doing work is called
(energy, displacement, force)
2. Match the pairs.
Group ‘A’ Group ‘B’
(1) Rolling object (a) Heat energy
(2) Food
(b) Atomic energy
(3) Stretched bow (c) Kinetic energy
(4) Sunlight (d) Potential energy
(5) Uranium
(e) Chemical energy
3. Can you tell ?
(a) When can we say that displacement
has taken place ?
(b) What should be taken into account
for measuring work ?
(c) What are the various forms of
energy?
(d) Describe one natural chain of
transformation of energy.
(e) Why should we save energy?
(f) What is ‘green energy'?
(g) What are the non-conventional
energy resources ?
(h) Which forms of energy from the sun
are used in solar energy devices ?
(i) Why should we maximise the use of
non-conventional energy resources ?
4. Who is the odd-one-out?
(1) Diesel, crude oil, natural gas, wind
(2) A running car, hauling a log, a book
kept on a table, picking up the school
bag.
(3) Sunlight, wind, waves, petrol
(4) Leaving the fan on in a vacant room,
leaving the TV on while working,
using AC during winter, putting off
the light when going out.
5. Find out the types of energy from the
following puzzle.
z sq|pymwne
| potentia 1
111 s uh v n|x i
tao je v dz g
qru1 a badh
ki ne til cat
r w d hk1 wyf
Activity :)
How can you save energy at home
and in school ? Discuss this with
your friends and list all such
measures. Put them into practice.
Find out about energy saving devices
available in the market.
83
12.
Simple Machines
In the following pictures, certain devices are used to
Observe and discuss. accomplish certain tasks more easily. Name the devices
and discuss how they help.
Such devices which are used
to get more work done in less
time and less effort are called
machines.
The nail cutter, the bottle
opener, the wheel used to push
the load shown in the picture are
all machines. They have only one
or two parts and a simple and
easy structure. Such machines are
called simple machines. Simple
machines can be handled easily,
and there are less chances of
these machines breaking down
or getting damaged. We use many
such machines in our day-to-day
life.
12.1: Various kinds of tasks
Observe the machines shown in the following pictures. For what
Can you tell ? purposes are they used ? Can you name some other machines
of this kind?
These machines have
many parts which carry out
many processes for completing
a task. For this purpose, the
parts are joined to one another.
Therefore, these machines are
called complex machines.
Some of the parts of such
complex machines are actually
simple machines. The structure
of complex machines is
complicated.
12.2 : Various machines
In our day-to-day life, we use simple or complex machines depending upon the task
to be carried out and the time and efforts required to do it.
(84)
Let us learn about some simple machines.
An inclined plane
A heavy drum is to be loaded onto a truck.
Ravi chose the plank A while Hamid chose the
plank B. Rahi did not use a plank at all.
1. Who would find the drum heaviest to load ?
2. Who would find it lightest ?
Which one of the planks A and B is longer ?
Which one has a steeper slope ?
What can we conclude from this ?
If a slanting plank is used to lift a weight, we
have to bear less of the weight and lifting it becomes
easier. Such a plank is called an “inclined plane’.
The more gradual the slope, the lesser is the weight
we bear. But, such an inclined plane is longer. The
steeper the slope, the shorter the inclined plane. But
we have to bear a greater weight.
12.3 : Loading a drum onto a truck
Let's try this.
000000000
Cut out a triangular piece of paper ABC.
Draw a red line along the edge AC. Roll
this paper around a pencil as shown in the
picture. What do you see?
The inclined side AC of the triangle
descends gradually from A to C.
The threads on a screw are made in
the same way. That is why, when a screw
is fitted in wood it goes in as if it is going
down an inclined plane. Therefore, less force
is required to fit a screw than to hammer a
nail. In other words, a screw is like a rolled
up inclined plane made of an iron strip.
A winding road or ghat that goes up
a mountain is also like an inclined plane
wrapped around the mountain. It helps big
vehicles to climb up and down the mountain
easily.
12.4 : The screw as an inclined plane
Observe and discuss.
Varaddha Ghat
Suresh Bave, Pune
29.Jun 2015
Two routes, namely, a pathway and a
road are available to climb the mountain
shown in the picture. Compare the time and
strength and your convenience required to
reach the mountain top.
85
12.5 : Ghat
In the past...
The Greek scientist Archimedes
invented the machine shown in this
picture. That is why, it is called the
Archimedes' Screw. It was used to
lift water from the hold of a ship.
Archimedes used a round pipe fitted
with a rod inside it. The pipe was
placed at an angle of 45° with one end
inside the water and the rod resting
on a flat surface. When the rod was
turned, water got lifted in this device.
Archimedes' screw
A wedge
An axe is used for cutting wood. A sharp tool is
formed on joining two inclined planes. Such a tool is
called a wedge. A wedge in used for breaking an object
into two pieces or to seperate objects stuck together.
An axe, a knife or a chisel are some examples of this
simple machine.
A needle and a nail are also kinds of wedges.
12.6 : Wedges
Use your brain power!)
D A needle is required for stitching cloth. We use a
knife for cutting fruit. If the tip of a needle or the
edge of a knife becomes blunt, then the needle does not penetrate the cloth and the
knife does not cut into the fruit. Why is this so?
A lever
A farmer is using a strong crow-bar to remove
the big stone bogged down in the farm. Such a
machine is called a lever.
A lever has three parts, namely, effort, load
and fulcrum.
1. The support at which the rod of a lever is 12.7 : Remov arge stone
rested is called the ‘fulcrum of a lever'. The
lever rotates about the fulcrum.
2. The weight lifted by a lever or the force
Use your brain power!
against which the lever acts is called the
‘load'. The arm of the lever from the
Which tasks can be done using
fulcrum to the load is called the ‘load arm’.
a lever?
3. The force applied on the other end of the rod to lift the load is called the
‘effort'. The part of the lever from the fulcrum to the effort is called the effort
arm'.
(86
FYLet's try this.
1. Place a pencil on a table. Place a ruler on it at right angles
with it. Put a paperweight on one end of the ruler. Press the
other end with your finger to lift the weight. Which are the
load arm, the effort arm and the fulcrum of this lever ?
Effort
Fulcrum
Load
Now, go on increasing the distance
between the paperweight and the pencil by
Load
four centimetres every time and see whether
the paperweight can be lifted when placed at
each of those distances.
What do you find ?
As the effort arm becomes longer and
12.8 : Lifting a paperweight longer compared to the load arm, less and
less force is required to lift the paperweight. Such a
Fulcrum
lever is called a lever of the first order.
2. The picture shows how we use an opener to remove
the cap of a sauce bottle. Try to do the same yourself.
To remove the tight-fitting cap, the opener is rested
on the cap and we apply a force on the opposite end
of the opener to pull it upwards. The cap also gets
pulled up as the opener rotates about the fulcrum.
Where are the fulcrum, load and effort in this case ?
12.9 : Removing the lid
3. How do we lift an object using tongs ?
The weight or the load is at one end of the arms
Fulcrum Effort
of the tongs. We apply effort in the middle of the
arms. It means the effort is applied in the middle of
the lever, while the fulcrum and the load are at the
Load
opposite ends.
There are three types of levers depending upon
the positions of the effort, the fulcrum and the load.
12.10 : Picking up an object
Effort
Effort
Lever of the first order | Lever of the second order | Lever of the third order
The fulcrum is in the The load is in the centre, The effort is in the centre,
centre, the load is at one the fulcrum on one side, the fulcrum on one side,
end while the effort is at and the effort, on the other and the load on the other
the other end.
side.
side.
Load
Load
Load
Effort
Fulcrum
Fulcrum
Fulcrum
Effort
Fulcrum
Effort
Effort
87
EUR Use your brain power!)
Some machines we use in our
day-to-day life are shown in the
picture. What is the type of lever in
each of these?
Let's try this.
A pulley
IM
Take a pencil, some sticking tape, an empty reel
of thread, half a metre of thick thread, a weight such
as an eraser that can be tied to the thread, play dough.
Place the pencil on the table so that it juts over the
edge of the table. Fix it firmly to the table using the
sticking tape. Insert the reel over the part of the pencil
that juts out. Put a lump of the play dough on the tip
of the pencil so that the reel does not come off. Draw
the thick thread having the weight at one end over this
reel. What happens when the loose end of the thread
is held and pulled down? The weight tied at the other
12.11 : A pulley in everyday life
end gets lifted up.
Such a device with a grooved wheel and thread
designed to lift weights is called a pulley.
How does it help to use a pulley ?
If we use a pulley, force can be applied in the downward direction for lifting the
weight in an upward direction. This is convenient and easy. You must have seen some
examples of pulleys in day-to-day use. Make a list of these.
Can you tell ?
A wheel and axle
1. All of you must have enjoyed sitting on a giant
wheel. What makes the giant wheel go round?
The giant wheel is fitted to a rod at its centre. This
rod is called an “axle’. When the axle starts rotating
with the help of electricity, the wheel fitted to it also
starts rotating. This combination of an axle and a wheel
is a simple machine. We see innumerable examples of
its use.
2. When the pedal of a bicycle is rotated, the wheel
starts rotating. How does this happen?
12.12 : A giant wheel
88
Maintenance of machines
Parts of machines rub against one another
when they are used. Soiled, dusty parts create
more friction. Some parts, affected by the
weather, rust and erode. Machines get damaged,
or become useless due to such wear and tear. To
avoid this, it is very important to take care of
machines.
During the maintenance of a machine, all its
parts are wiped clean. Oil or lubricant is released
betweem parts that rub against each other, so
that there is less friction between them and the
wearing is reduced. Machines are covered when
not in use to prevent dust settling on them. To
prevent the effect of weather, metallic parts in a
machine are painted externally, and the machines
are always kept dry.
12.13 : Maintenance of machines
Do you know?
SM
Always remember...)
Big factories have a separate
department for the maintenance
of machines.
Factories are closed at regular,
fixed periods for the maintenance
1 of machines.
If machines are not properly maintained
they will be of no use when we actually
need them.
Before we use a machine, we must learn
how to handle it properly so that there
are no accidents.
What we have learnt-
Machines are used for reducing
efforts, and doing more work in less
time.
Some machines are simple while
others are complex.
• The wedge, the lever, the inclined
plane, the pulley and the wheel and
axle are simple machines.
• There are three types of levers based
on the positions of effort, load and
fulcrum.
• Machines should be maintained
properly to keep them in good working
condition.
Science watch ...
To carry out a task efficiently, sometimes we have to use a trick. The trick can be
effected with a machine. Try to make a useful machine from old, unused, junk material.
• Find an old fountain pen and use it to devise a machine.
(89)
Exercise
1. Classify the following as a lever,
a pulley and an inclined plane :
A wedge, a needle, a staircase, a slide,
the wheel of a flagpole, nutcrackers,
scissors, an opener, an axe, a crane,
a knife.
(d) What is a lever? How are the
orders of the lever determined ?
5. Why is this so?
(a) Traveller's bags have wheels.
(b) Machines have to be maintained.
(c) A bicyle is said to be a complex
machine.
2. Fill in the blanks using the proper
word and complete the statements.
(a) The ....... in the centre, the ..........
on one side and the ...... on the other
side make a lever of the first order.
(b) The ..... in the centre, the ........ on
one side and the ......... On the other
side make a lever of the second
order.
(c) The ........... in the centre, the .......
on one side and the........on the
other side make a lever of the third
order.
6. Name the levers mentioned in the
following passage. Identify the
fulcrum, load and effort of each and
say which type of lever it is.
Ravi and Savita sit on a sea-saw
in a garden. In the mean time, a
gardener is trimming trees in the
garden. He puts the leaves and other
garbage in the wheelbarrow. Later,
Ravi gets thirsty and he buys lemon
sherbet. The sherbet seller cuts the
lemon and squeezes it using a lemon
squeezer. He puts small pieces of ice
in the glass with the help of the
tongs.
3. Which machines will you use to do
the following work? Write their
types.
(a) To remove the lid of a tin.
(b) To lift bricks to the top of a tall
building.
(c) To cut vegetables.
(d) To draw water from a well.
(e) To hold a papad for roasting it.
Write the answers to the following
questions in your own words.
(a) What is meant by simple
machines ?
(b) Mention the advantages of using
a machine.
(c) What is meant by complex
machines ?
(Activity :)
Make a list of the various
machines used in your home and
neighbourhood and write their
types.
Go to a bicycle repair shop,
observe how a bicycle is repaired,
and note down the information.
90)
13.
Sound
Can you tell ?
Some sounds are depicted in the pictures below.
Have you heard these sounds ? Put a tick mark (✓) in the
box if you have, and cross (X) if you have not. What words
are used in your locality to denote these sounds? Write them
below the pictures.
13.1 : Examples of various sounds
1. Which sounds do you hear during the recess
in the school?
2. When there is silence in the classroom, close
your eyes and sit quietly. Which sounds in your
surroundings can you hear now?
Prepare a common list of all these sounds and
discuss them. You will see that there is a lot of
diversity in the innumerable sounds that we hear.
Classify these sounds in two ways - soft/loud and
pleasant/unpleasant.
Some sounds are loud and
are heard easily while
some others are very soft
and cannot be heard unless
we listen attentively. We
like some sounds. On the
other hand, we get annoyed
by some other sounds.
How are sounds produced ?
Try this.
1. When a song is being played on a radio or a
music system in the house, place your hand on its
speaker. What do you feel ?
Put off the music. What do you feel now?
13.2 : Speakers
2. Take a rubber band and stretch it as shown in
the picture. Pluck the stretched band.
Apart from the movement of the rubber band,
what else did you notice ?
13.3: A stretched rubber band
3. Spread some sawdust or mustard seeds or
sand on the diaphragm of a tabla. Knock on
the diaphragm lightly with a finger.
What do you see happening so long as the
tabla makes a sound? What happens when
the sound stops ?
What do we understand from these
observations ?
13.4 : Tabla
Use your brain power!
The objects that produce sound, that is, the
diaphragm of the speaker, the rubber band, the
diaphragm of a tabla, show a certain movement.
That is, they have a certain kind of motion. They
oscillate rapidly. In other words, they vibrate.
When a metal dish falls on the
floor, it makes a loud noise.
What do we do to stop the
noise ? What is the effect of
that action ?
The vibration of an object is necessary
for the production of sound. As long as the
object vibrates, the sound is heard. When the
vibration stops, the sound also stops.
The object due to which sound is produced
is called the source of that sound.
- Try this.
The sounds of a sitar, a bell, water
that drops from a tap, a saucer that
breaks on falling down - what is it
that vibrates when these sounds are
produced ?
Do you know?
—
Voice box / Larynx
Acoustics : The science of sound,
resonance, including the production,
propagation and effects of sound is
called acoustics. The intensity of sound
is measured in a unit called decibel (dB).
The vibration of the vocal cords in our
larynx or 'voice box also produces
sound. The voice box is located in our
throat. The quality of the sound produced
in the larynx depends upon the tautness
of the vocal cords.
Vocal
cords
Voice box/
Larynx
Trachaea
92
Let's try this.
Take a pot filled with water.
Strike it lightly on its rim.
What do you see?
Why are waves formed on the water in the pot ?
13.5 : Vibrations in the water and
How sound is heard
production of sound
There is air around a source of sound. As the source of sound begins to vibrate, the
layer of air nearest to the source also vibrates. A wave of vibrations of that sound
spreads in all the directions from the source of sound. Such a wave is called a sound
wave. The sound waves reach our ears. There is a delicate diaphragm or eardrum in the
cavity of our ears. It starts vibrating, too. The sensation produced by these vibrations
are passed on to the brain through the nerves in the ears and we hear the sound.
Propagation of sound
Let's try this.
1. Take two balloons. Fill air in
one and water in the other. Press
the balloon filled with air against
your ear as shown in the picture.
Rub a finger on the balloon and
listen to the sound.
Repeat the same activity with the
Water
Air
balloon filled with water.
balloon balloon 13.6. Pronao
13.6 : Propagation of sound Through which balloon do we hear
a clearer sound?
2. Stand at the end of a big table and make a friend stand at the other end. Ask the
friend to knock lightly on the table. You will hear a faint sound.
Now you press your ear to the table and ask the friend to repeat the knock. What
difference do you notice ?
Sound travels in the form of waves
New words
through air, water or through a solid and
Propagation of sound
reaches our ears. Sound is propagated more
clearly through a liquid than through air. It
Sound is said to be propagated
when sound waves spread in all
is heard most clearly through a solid. Why
is this so?
directions from a source of sound.
The medium of propagation
Transmission of sound occurs at a
of sound
different speed through different mediums. The substance around a source of
Transmission of sound is faster through sound through which sound waves
a liquid than through a gas, and faster spread is called the medium of
through a solid than through a liquid.
propagation of sound.
(93)
Use your brain power!
If a bell is hung in a vacuum container,
will its sound be heard outside ?
New word
Vacuum means an empty space from
where air is partially removed.
Observe and discuss :
1. Which of these sounds is pleasant?
2. Which sounds are a nuisance to people ?
Noise pollution
A loud sound is harsh to the ear. Such
sounds produce noise.
13.7 : Various sounds
13.8 : A noisy scene
1. Make a list of all the sounds implied in the picture.
2. How would this atmosphere affect a person who is not feeling well?
3. Would you be able to study in these conditions ?
094
The situations shown in the two pictures on page 94 are often seen around us. Some
of the sounds they depict are pleasant while others are harsh. Very loud or continuous
noise has adverse effects on the people of that locality. Their hearing may get impaired
which can even lead to deafness. It can also cause restlessness, irritability and mental
exhaustion. One cannot work with concentration. This kind of continuous noise which
may have ill effects is called noise pollution.
Noise pollution
occurs when we
hear one or many
sounds harmful
to the ear.
Measures for preventing noise pollution
1. As far as possible, we should avoid blowing the horn.
2. The volume of the TV or radio in the house should be
restricted to those watching the programmes.
3. Vehicles should be maintained properly to reduce the
unnecessary sounds they produce.
4. Factories, airports, railway stations and bus stands should
be located at the proper distance, away from residential
areas.
Always remember...)
Some of the sounds
that we enjoy can be a
nuisance for others.
Believe it or not !
Birds like the robin and the woodcock can recognize the
sound of an earthworm in the soil, and find their prey.
This is because their hearing organs are very sensitive.
Some species of grasshopper produce a sound by
rubbing their legs together while flying in the air.
The flapping of the wings of the bee or the mosquito
produces a humming sound. Have you heard
such sounds ?
What we have learnt-
• Vibrations are required for the
production of sound.
• A medium is required for the
propagation of sound.
• Sound is propagated through gaseous,
liquid and solid mediums.
• Noise is disagreeable, irregular and
loud.
Noise pollution occurs due to
continuous noise. Noise pollution has
adverse effects on our health.
• Heavy traffic and industrial areas
cause the maximum noise pollution.
• Noise pollution is a social problem.
• It is necessary that everybody takes
measures to prevent noise pollution.
Blowing the horns of vehicles is
prohibited near places like schools and
hospitals. These rules should always
be followed.
Exercise
4. Complete the table.
Unpleasant
Pleasant
1. Fill in the blanks with the proper
words.
(a) The propagation of sound does not
occur through a ........... .
(b) Noise pollution is a .......... issue.
(c) The sound which is disagreeable to
the ears is called....
(d) Noise has adverse effects on
our ...........
Nature of sound
Speaking
Whispering
Aeroplane sounds
Horns of Vehicles
Railway Engine
Rustling of leaves
Neighing of a
horse
Ticking of a clock
2. What should we do?
(a) The silencer of a motorcycle is
broken.
(b) A factory in the surroundings is
producing continuous loud noise.
Project :
3. Write the answers in your own words.
(a) What is meant by vibration ?
(b) Explain with the help of practical
examples how sound is propagated
through solids.
(c) What is meant by noise pollution?
(d) What measures will you take to
control noise pollution ?
• Prepare a list of the harsh sounds
heard near your house. Write
about those sounds which
produce noise pollution.
Collect information about places
where loud noise is prohibited
and discuss why it is so.
UR
14.
Light and the Formation of Shadows
Can you tell ?
1. Can we see anything in total darkness ?
2. What helps us to see the objects around us ?
3. What does the light in each one of the pictures
originate from?
14.1 : Sources of light
Use your brain power!
The objects or materials which emit light,
meaning those which themselves are a source of
light, are called luminous objects or materials.
The intensity of light is determined by the extent to
which the objects emit light. For example, the light
emitted by an electric torch is more intense than
that obtained from a candle.
The objects or materials that are not sources of
light themselves, are called non-luminous objects
or materials.
Some man-made objects or materials also emit
light. These are called artificial sources of light.
The Sun is the main natural source of light.
Other stars seen in the night sky, fireflies, some
anglerfish as well as honey mushroom are natural
sources of light.
Make a list of some luminous
| objects and substances and
classify them into natural and
artificial sources of light.
The propagation of light
You may have seen in the afternoon, rays of
light entering through a slit in a door or a small hole
in the roof. As these rays of light from the slit or the
hole move towards the floor, the dust particles in
their way are seen clearly. Due to these particles,
the path of the light becomes visible and we can
see that their path is along straight lines.
14.2 Light entering
Let's try this.
through a window
Take three cardboards. Make a small hole in the centre of each cardboard using a thick
needle. Arrange the cardboards in such a way that the three holes are in the same line, as
shown in figure 14.3 on page 98. Stand a burning candle on one side of the cardboards
and look at the flame of the candle from the other side.
97)
Step 1
Look at the flame of the candle
Step 2
Now move any one of the cardboards.
Do you see the flame ?
Why do you not see the flame ?
14.3 How light travels
Let's try this.
Take a straight tube that can be bent easily. As shown in the
figure, place a burning candle on a stand, and look at it through
the tube. Then bend the tube and look at the candle again.
What do you see?
Use your brain
power!
In which step is the
flame of the candle seen
clearly? Why?
Step 2
Step 1
14.4 : Looking at the candle
Light travels in a straight line. This is called the linear propagation of light.
Source of light
Reflection of light
How do we see an object ?
The rays of light falling on an
object from a source of light are thrown
back from the surface of that object. This
is called reflection of light. We see the
object when the reflected rays reach our
Object
eyes.
Do you know?
Stars are luminous. Planets, satellites are
non-luminous. Sunlight reflected from the surface
of the moon reaches us. That is how we can see
the moon. We call this light moonlight.
14.5 : How an object is seen
198
. 1. In which objects
UTC Can you tell? do we see a reflection?
2. What is the difference between an object and
its reflection ? What causes the difference?
Let us see how light is reflected from the
three surfaces shown alongside.
When you see your face in a mirror, the light reflected
from your face falls on the mirror, and gets reflected back
again. That is why you see the image in the mirror.
Do you see your image in a glass pane? You do,
although it is somewhat faint. No image will be seen at
all on a wooden surface.
You may have seen your image formed in surfaces such
as a new steel dish, the glossy granite cladding of a wall
and the still water in a lake. Make a list of other similar
surfaces. Compare the images seen in them. Make a guess
about the property of a surface due to which an image is
formed. Discuss this with your teachers and parents.
14.6 : An image
Let's try this.
Images in a plane mirror
Stand in front of a plane mirror and look at your image in it.
1. Raise your right hand. Which hand of the mirror image
is raised ?
2. What change do you see in the image if you decrease or
increase your distance from the mirror ?
3. Is there any difference between your height and height
of the mirror image ?
The left and right sides of the original object appear
to be exchanged in the mirror image.
The image is as far behind the mirror as the object
is in front of it.
The size of the image is the same as that of the
object.
Use your brain power!
1. How will you light up a dark room using
reflected light?
2. Try to start the TV by operating the remote
U control from behind it.
14.7 : The image in a plane mirror
A pinhole camera
Try this. Take an empty cylindrical box. Remove its cap on one side and
paste a thin white paper in its place. Make a small hole at the centre
of the other cap. Light a candle and hold the box in such a way that the flame of the candle
is in front of the hole. Now you will see an upside down or inverted image of the flame on
the thin paper at the other end.
Thin
paper
Inverted
image
Cap
i Use your
brain power!)
Hole
Candle
Why is the image
on the diaphragm of
the pinhole camera
inverted ?
14.8 : Pinhole camera
UY Can you tell ?. 1. What difference do you notice on looking through the
windows in the picture ? What causes the difference ?
2. The picture shows transparent, opaque, translucent window panes. Spot them.
Depending on the nature of the
window pane, we may or may not see
the objects on the other side through it.
Identify the transparent, opaque
and translucent objects from among the
following : piece of a glass, wax paper,
tinted glass, oil paper, white plastic, a
tea kettle, a notebook, cloth, water, a
wooden cupboard, sheet of a notebook.
14.9 : Window
• The material through which light passes is said to be transparent.
• The material through which light does not pass is said to be opaque.
• The material through which light passes partially is said to be translucent.
Formation of shadow
Let's try this.
Take an electric torch. Flash its light
on a wall. Now make your friend stand
in between the torch and the wall.
What happens ?
(100)
14.10 : Formation of a shadow
If an opaque object comes in the way of a light source, light does not pass through it.
As a result, the light does not reach a wall or any other surface on the other side of the
object. That part remains dark. This dark part is called the “shadow of the object'.
Compare this.
Compare the objects in your environment with the shadows they form.
B
Try this.
Ask your friend to stand at a certain distance from you in a
big room and obtain the shadow of your friend on the wall with the
help of a torch. Now carry out the following actions. Observe and
make a note of the changes taking place in the shadow.
1. Send the friend closer to the wall.
2. Ask the friend to come towards you.
3. Next, you move further away from him
and towards him again.
4. Hold the torch high and then low.
5. Go toward the left and then to the right
of the friend.
The shadow of an object is formed only when light does not pass through the
object. The kind of shadow it forms depends upon the relative distances between the
source of light, the object and the surface or the screen on which the shadow is formed.
The shadow of an object formed due to sunlight is long in the mornings and
evenings and short in the afternoon. We can easily note these changes if we observe
the trees along the roadside. This change in the shadow depends on the source of light,
the object and also on the surface on which the shadow is formed.
(101
Do you know?
A sundial : A sundial is an
instrument that indicates the time with
the help of the extent and the direction
of the shadow of an object formed in
sunlight. Earlier, time was measured
by placing a stick parallel to the axis
of the earth and by noting the position
of its shadow on the dial at different
times of the day. The largest sundial
is at Jantar Mantar, New Delhi.
The research work presented by
the Indian scientist Sir C. V. Raman
regarding scattering of light is known
as the “Raman Effect. He discovered
this effect on 28th February 1928. To
commemorate
this event,
28th February
is celebrated
as “National
Science Day'
since 1987 in
India.
32
A little fun!
Use your hands and feet to make
different shadow shapes of birds, animals,
etc.
ou
G-
Y
Let's try this.
1. Apparatus : A glass, water, a large white sheet of
paper
Place a glass filled with water on a sheet of paper in the
window so that it receives direct sunlight. What is seen on
the paper ?
Can we do the same in a dark room with the help of a
prism and a torch? What do we learn from this ?
2. Apparatus – Soap water, a small loop of wire.
If you dip the wire loop in the soap water and then blow
on it, soap bubbles are formed. The beautiful colours of the
rainbow are seen in these bubbles.
3. What do you see on holding a CD in the sun ?
(102)
e Always remember...
In the past ...
The British scientist Sir Isaac
Newton made a special disc.
One side of the disc was divided
equally into seven petals of
the seven colors – red, orange,
yellow, green, blue, indigo and
violet. The disc was fitted on a
stand and rotated fast. As the
disc rotated, the seven colours
disappeared and only white was seen. This proved
that sunlight is made of seven colors. That is why,
the disc is known as Newton's disc.
Newton wrote a book called ‘Opticks' about light.
The shape of a shadow
depends upon the source
of light, the object and
the surface on which it is
formed. We should not get
frightened by the shadows
we see at night because
there is simple science
behind that.
What we have learnt-)
A substance that emits light is a source of light.
The natural sources of light are the sun, the stars, fireflies, etc. The lantern, the
flame of a candle, an electric bulb, etc. are artificial sources of light.
Light is propagated in a straight line.
Light must be reflected from the surface of an object for the object to be seen.
If an opaque object obstructs the path of light, it casts a shadow.
• White sunlight contains seven colours.
Science watch ...
Many questions arise in our mind while studying science; some easy, some
difficult. Where can we find the answers to them?
Do not keep the questions to yourself. Keep asking those questions and look for
the answers. The store of knowledge is enormous. Glean as many particles of it as
you can.
Did you ever wonder :
• Why do we pucker our lips when blowing a candle out ?
When we pucker our lips, we leave only a small space for the air to come out.
That increases the pressure on the air and it helps to put out the candle.
( 103
Exercise
3. Match the following.
Group A Group B
(a) Mirror (1) Non-luminous
(b) Firefly (2) Inverted image
(c) Pinhole camera (3) Reflection
(d) Moon
(4) Luminous
1. Choose an appropriate word and fill
in the blanks.
(a) A .......... is a natural source of
light.
(b) A ......... is an artificial source of
light.
(c) When light passes through a prism,
it gets separated into ....... colours.
(d) The image obtained in the
pinhole camera is ..........
(e) A shadow is formed when an
........... object comes in the way
of light.
(f) When a ........... object comes
in the way of light, light passes
......... it.
(options : seven, star, through,
transparent, opaque, colors, shape,
erect, inverted, luminous, candle)
4. Write the answers to the following.
(a) What things are necessary for the
formation of a shadow ?
(b) When can an object be seen ?
(c) What is a shadow ?
Project :
Prepare a Newton's disc.
Find out how to save electricity
with the help of the sunlight we
receive during the day.
Read a biography of Sir C. V.
Raman and find out about the
discoveries he made.
2. Write whether of the following
objects are luminous or
non-luminous.
Object
Luminous/
Non-luminous
A book
A burning candle
A wax cloth
A pencil
A pen
A light bulb
A tyre
A torch
(104)
15.
Fun with Magnets
Can you tell ?
1. Pins in a pin holder do not fall even when it is
held upside down. Why is this so?
2. While we are shutting the door of a fridge, we
find that it closes automatically from a certain distance
and does not open unless pulled again. Why is this so?
A magnet is used in these gadgets. A magnet is
fitted in the cap of a pin holder and in the door of a
fridge. Iron objects stick to a magnet.
What is a magnet?
15.1 : A pinholder and a fridge
The material to which objects made from iron, nickel,
cobalt, etc. get attracted is called a ‘magnet’. This
property of a material is called ‘magnetism'.
2-Y)
Let's try this.
15.2: A magnet
1. Take a magnet from the laboratory and bring it
near various objects in your use. Which of them stick to
the magnet ? What material is each of them made of?
Observe these things carefully. Classify the objects into
two groups : those which stick to the magnet and those
which do not.
2. Take a mixture of sand, pieces of paper, sawdust,
iron filings and pins in a saucer and pass a magnet
around the mixture. What do you see?
15.3 : To identify the
magnetic materials
we use
The materials that stick
to a magnet are called
magnetic materials,
while those that do not
stick to a magnet are
called non-magnetic
materials. The metals
iron, cobalt, nickel are
magnetic materials.
(105)
In the past...
There is a legend about the discovery of
magnets. It is said that a shepherd named Magnes
lived in Greece. Once, while his sheep were
grazing, he sat down on a big rock. But, what a
surprise he got when he tried to get up! His staff
and his shoes were stuck to the rock. He had to
use great force to pull himself away from the
rock.
He realized that what had happened was 15.4 : The story of Magnes
because of the iron ferrule on his staff and the iron nails in his shoes. However, other
rocks did not stick to his shoes or staff. Later, he showed the rock to everybody.
The rock was named magnetite after Magnes, the shepherd. Magnetite is a natural
magnet. It is also possible that the name ‘magnet' came from Magnesia, the part of
Greece where magnets were discoverd.
Find out.
How is a mariner's compass used ?
It was known quite long ago to the people in China and Europe that a piece
of magnetite, hung freely, always settled in the north-south direction. These rocks
then came to be used for finding the directions while travelling through unknown
regions. That is why, they are also called lodestones (leading stones). This led to
the invention of the mariner’s compass.
Magnets can have a variety of shapes depending upon their uses. Today, magnets
are used in many machines and gadgets or devices. They are all man-made magnets.
Find out where the magnets shown in the pictures below are used.
Bar magnets, disc magnets, horseshoe magnets, ring-shaped magnets, cylindrical
magnets as also small button magnets are the different shapes of magnets in
everyday use.
HO
15.5: Various man-made magnets
( 106
Magnetism
When a magnet attracts an object, that object is displaced due to the magnetic force.
In places like factories, ports, garbage depots, large objects are shifted from place to place.
For this purpose, cranes with magnets are used. Work is done by magnetic force. This
shows that magnetism is a kind of energy.
Characteristics of a magnet
-
Y Let's try this.
1. Determine the directions in the class or
laboratory. Tie a thread to the centre of a bar magnet
and hang it from a stand. Note the direction in which
the magnet settles and turn it around again. Let it settle
and note the direction. Do this many times.
What do you observe ?
15.6 : Direction in which the
magnet settles
A magnet always settles in the north-south direction.
The end of a magnet that points to the north is called
the north pole while the end that points to the south is
called the south pole. The north pole is indicated by
'N' and the south pole, by 'S'.
2. Place some iron filings on a sheet of paper and
pass a bar magnet over them. Pick up the bar magnet
by holding it in the centre. What do you see?
To which part of the magnet do most of the iron
filings stick ? On which part do we see fewer filings?
What can we conclude from this?
15.7 : Magnetic power
The magnetic force is concentrated at the two
ends or poles of a magnet.
3. Take a bar magnet that can be cut with scissors
or a knife. Take iron filings on a sheet of paper and
place the magnet on it. Most of the iron filings will be
seen to stick to its poles.
Now cut the magnet into two pieces as shown in
the picture and place those pieces on iron filings. Pick
up each of the pieces and observe them.
What do you find ?
15.8 : Characteristics of
magnetic poles
If a magnet is divided into two parts,
two independent magnets are formed.
It means that the two poles of a magnet
cannot be separated from each other.
15.9 : More magnets from one
(107)
4. Fix a powerful bar magnet to a stand as
shown in the figure. Fix an iron bar at a short
distance below the magnet. Take iron filings
near the iron bar. What do you see ?
After some time take the magnet away.
What happens now?
Iron filings stick to the iron bar when the
magnet is near it and fall off as soon as the
magnet is taken away. That is, the magnetism
in the bar vanishes.
15.10 : Induced magnetism
A magnetic material acquires magnetism
when placed near a magnet. This
magnetism is called induced magnetism.
S
5. Fix a bar magnet to a stand as shown in
the figure. Let it become steady. Take another
bar magnet near the hanging bar magnet.
Observe what happens. Do the same again and
again, exchanging the ends of the magnet. What
do you see?
There is repulsion between like poles
of a magnet, while there is attraction
between the opposite poles.
S
NS
15.11 : Attraction and repulsion in magnets
6. Take a needle or nail. Place it steady on
a table. Keep on rubbing a magnet over it from
one end to the other. Do this 7-8 times. Now take
a few pins near that needle/nail. What is seen ?
In this way, magnetic objects acquire
magnetism. Magnetism of this kind is temporary.
It lasts for a short while.
15.12 : Artificial magnet
A little fun!
7
Make an electromagnet
Apparatus : An iron nail of about 10 cm length
and a 1-metre long insulated copper wire, a battery
cell, pins or other magnetic objects.
Wind the copper wire around the nail as shown
in the figure. Join both the ends of the wire to the
cell. Now take the pins near the head of the nail.
What do you see?
15.13 : Electromagnet
(108
During the above activity
we saw that the pins stick
to the nail. Now stop the
electric current and see what
happens. The pins sticking
to the nail fall off. Why does
that happen ? Magnetism is
produced in the nail due to
the electric current. When
it is put off, the magnetism
vanishes. Such a magnet is
called an electromagnet.
This magnetism is temporary.
Electromagnetism is
used in many places in our
day-to-day life.
15.14 : Use of electromagnet
For example, it is used in instruments
such as a door bell and a crane.
On the other hand, the magnets fixed
to a pin holder or the door of a cupboard
are permanent magnets. Permanent
magnets are made from a mixture of
nickel, cobalt and iron. For example, the
material alnico is a mixture of aluminium,
nickel and cobalt.
In the past...
The British scientist Michael
Faraday developed the technique of
producing electricity with the help of a
magnet.
Michael Faraday was born in a
poor family. As a young boy, he had
to work with a book seller. There, he
read many books and developed an
interest in science. Later, he went on to
do research at the Royal Institution in
London. It is due to Faraday's research
that today we can use electricity
and electromagnetism in innumerable
instruments in our day-to-day life.
15.15: Maglev train
The properties of
electromagnetism and repulsion
between magnets are used in a
maglev train. Due to the repulsion
between the train and the rail the
force of friction does not come
into play and the train slides over
the rails with great speed. The
magnets fixed on the two sides of
the train help it to move forward.
To see how the maglev train
works, visit www.youtube.com
type maglev train, and click.
(109)
Do you know?
There is a strip of magnetic material in ATM
cards, credit cards, etc. where necessary information
about the user is stored.
803
AUTHORISED SIGNATURE
NOTALE FORET NOROC
NOT VALID UNLESS SIGNED
CANDUM
Magnetic materials are also used to store data
in the hard disk of a computer, an audio or video
tape, etc.
How is magnetism destroyed ?
Magnetism gets destroyed when a magnet
is heated, thrown, knocked about or broken
into pieces. Therefore, it is important to store
magnets carefully. A piece of soft iron is placed
in the box in which a magnet is kept. The bar of
soft or pure iron protects a magnet, therefore,
such a bar is called a magnet keeper.
Magnet keeper
15.16 : Guarding a magnet
PY Always remember...
What we have learnt-
Various scientific discoveries,
the knowledge we gain through them,
the various instruments or gadgets we
develop with its help are all useful
for the progress of man. They must
be used for the good of mankind.
We have to take precautions
while working with electricity or with
important devices. We must use them
under the guidance of our elders.
• Iron, nickel, cobaltare magnetic
metals.
• Magnets settle along the north-south
direction when suspended freely.
• Magnetism is concentrated near the
poles.
• The poles of a magnet cannot be
separated.
Electromagnetic energy is used in our
day-to-day life.
Science watch ...
Scientists have made many discoveries and inventions on which our life depends
today. Can I become a scientist too ? How should I prepare to become a scientist ?
Read stories of scientific discoveries and inventions. Try out various activities
and different ways of doing them. Ponder over your experiences.
(110)
Exercise
1. How will you do this ?
(a) Determine whether a material is
magnetic or non-magnetic.
(b) Explain that a magnet has a certain
magnetic field.
(c) Find the north pole of a magnet.
(d) When magnetic material is taken
close to a magnet, the material
acquires ......
(permanent magnetism, induced
magnetism)
(e) If a magnet attracts a piece of
metal, that piece must be made of
.............
.
Which magnet will you use?
(a) Iron is to be separated from trash.
(b) You are lost in a forest.
(c) A window shutter opens and shuts
continuously in the wind.
(any other metal but iron, magnetic
material or iron, non-magnetic
material)
(f) A magnet remains steady in a
.............. direction.
(east-west, north-south)
Write the answers in your words.
(a) How is an electromagnet made ?
(b) Write the properties of a magnet.
(c) What are the practical uses of a
magnet ?
3. Fill in the blanks with the appropriate
word.
(a) If a bar magnet is hung by a thread
tied at its centre, its north pole
becomes steady in the direction of
the ................. Pole of the earth.
(South, north, east, west)
(b) If a bar magnet is cut into equal
pieces by cutting it at right angles
to its axis at two places, ........... bar
magnets are formed, and a total of
................ poles are formed.
(6,3,2)
(Activity :
• Collect information regarding
how the various magnets used
in our day-to-day tasks are
produced.
Collect information about the
magnetism of the earth.
(c) There is repulsion between the
.......... poles of a magnet, and
attraction between its
poles.
(opposite, like.)
(111
16.
The Universe
Observe and discuss.
Make use of a telescope to observe
the sky on a clear night without clouds.
(Suggestion for teachers - Arrange
such an observation session for all the
students of the class. Carry with you some
books on astronomy to consult during the
session)
16.1: Observation of the sky
Location of
the sun
If you observe the clear sky on a dark night,
you will see a smoky white band full of stars
spreading north-south in the sky. This is the
Milky Way. It is also known as “Mandakini'.
A group of innumerable stars and their
planetary systems are together known as a
'galaxy'. The Milky Way is the galaxy in
which our solar system is located. The Milky
Way is a part of the 'Local Group of galaxies.
There are many such galaxies in the universe.
The Milky Way includes many stars smaller
than our Sun as well as many others that are
thousands of times bigger than the Sun. It
also includes many other celestial bodies such
as clusters of stars, nebulae, clouds of gases,
clouds of dust, dead stars, newly born stars, etc.
The galaxy that is closest to our Milky Way is
called Andromeda.
16.2: The Milky Way
The universe includes innumerable galaxies,
the space between them and also energy.
16.3 : The Andromeda galaxy
(112)
Types of galaxies : Various types identified according to their shapes
Irregular
16.5 : Hubble Telescope
Spiral
Elliptical
Barred spiral
16.4 : Various galaxies
The scientist Edwin Hubble showed that there exist
many galaxies beyond our Milky Way. In 1990, NASA,
the American space agency launched the ‘Hubble
Telescope' in the orbit of the earth. The Hubble telescope
has made it easier to look for stars, to take photographs
and to obtain spectrums.
Stars
The thousands of twinkling stars that we observe
in the clear night sky are part of our Milky Way. Some
of the stars that we see are bright whereas others are
faint. Stars radiating different colours such as blue,
white, yellow and reddish can be seen in the sky. We
also see stars with varying brightness (luminance). The
birth place of stars are the huge nebulae, made of dust
particles and gases. Generally, the surface temperature
of stars ranges from 3500°C to 50000°C. The colour of
stars changes according to their temperature.
16.6 : A nebula
Some types of stars
• Sun-like stars : These stars can be slightly smaller or bigger than the sun. But there is a lot
of difference in their temperatures. Examples : stars like Sirius, Alpha Centauri.
• Red Giants : The temperature of these stars ranges between 3000°C and 4000°C. But their
luminance can be 100 times that of the sun. Their diameter is 10 to 100 times that of the sun
and they are red in colour.
Super Nova : These are even brighter and larger than the red giant stars. Their temperature
is between 3000°C to 4000°C but their diameter can be more than a hundred times greater
than that of the Sun.
• Binary or Twin Stars : More than half of the stars in sky are binary stars. They consist of
two stars that revolve around each other. At times, three or four stars that revolve around
each other have also been located.
Variable Stars : The luminance and shape of these stars is not stable. They are constantly
contracting or expanding. When a star expands, it emits less energy and at such times its
brightness decreases. As against this, when a star contracts, its surface temperature increases
and the star emits greater energy and appears brighter. For example, Polaris (Pole Star).
(113
Find out.
Visit the sites of the institutes ISRO (www.isro.gov) and NASA (www.nasa.
gov) and collect information about the various celestial bodies in the solar
system and universe, and discuss the same in the class.
Can you tell ?
1. Which celestial bodies form the solar system?
2. What is the difference between stars and planets ?
3. How many planets are there in our solar system ?
4. What is to be found between Mars and Jupiter?
The solar system
The solar system consists of the sun, the planets,
asteroids, comets and meteors. The planets Mercury, Venus,
Mars, Jupiter and Saturn can be easily seen.
The Mercury, Venus,
Earth and Mars are the
inner planets whereas the
Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and
Neptune are outer planets.
Outer planets have rings
around them. The crust
of all the inner planets is
hard. The outer planets
have gaseous outer cover.
The sun
The sun which is at the centre of the solar system is a
yellow coloured star. Its surface temperature is around
6000°C. The size of the sun is so huge that around 13 lakh
planets of the size of the earth can be easily placed within
it. Due to the gravitational force of the sun, the celestial
bodies in the solar system revolve around it. The diameter
of the sun is approximately 13,92,000 km. The sun rotates
around its axis and while doing so, it revolves around the
centre of the Milky Way taking the solar system along
The sun
with it.
Planets of the solary system – facts and figures
Name of Number Inclination Period of | Period of Magnetism | Atmosphere Rings
the of known of the axis rotation* revolution*
planet satellites (in
degrees)
Mercury 0
58.65 days 88 days No
No None
0.01
Venus
0
177.2
243.00 days
225 days
No
None
Earth
23.5
Yes
Yes
None
2
25.2
No
Yes
None
Mars
Jupiter
Saturn
64
3.1
24 hours
1 year
(365 days)
24 hrs 37 mn | 1.88 years
| 9 hrs 56 mn | 11.87 years
10 hrs 40 mn
17 hrs 24 mn
16 hrs 11 mn 164 years
Yes
Yes
Yes
33
26.7
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Uranus
27
Yes
97.9
28.8
Neptune
13
Yes
Yes
Yes
(114)
Mercury : This planet
Venus : It is the
is closest to the sun. It
brightest planet in
is visible in the
the solar system. It
morning and the
is seen in the sky
evening if it is away
in the east before
from the sun. A
the sunrise and in
number of depressions, which look like the west after the
volcanic craters, but are actually caused sunset. It rotates around itself from
by meteoric falls can be seen on the surface east to west. It is the hottest planet.
of Mercury. Mercury is the fastest moving
planet.
Earth : It is the
Mars : It is the
third planet of the
fourth planet in the
solar system. No
solar system. As
other planet other
the soil on Mars
than the earth has
contains iron, its
life on it. As the
colour is reddish.
earth is a magnet,
Hence Mars is also
there is a magnetic field around the earth. called the Red Planet. The highest and
It diverts the harmful rays from the sun longest mountain in the solar system
towards the polar regions of the earth. ‘Olympus Mons’ is located on Mars.
Jupiter : This is the
Saturn : It is the sixth
largest planet of the
planet of the solar
solar system. It is so
system and next only
huge that as many as
to Jupiter in size. It
1397 planets of the
is considered to be
size of the earth can
a peculiar planet
because of the rings
get accommodated in
around it. Though its mass is 95 times
it. Even though the planet is so huge, it that of the earth, its density is very low.
revolves around itself with a great speed. | If it were dropped into a sea large enough
As huge storms occur frequently on it, it to hold it; it would actually float in it!
is also called the ‘Stormy Planet'.
Uranus : It is the
Neptune : It is the
seventh planet
eighth planet in
in the solar
the solar system. A
system. It cannot
season on Neptune
be seen without
lasts for about 41
a telescope. Its
years.
axis is so greatly
On this
inclined that it
planet winds blow
appears as if it is
with extremely high speed.
rolling along on its orbit.
* The periods of rotation and revolution of the planets are expressed relative to those periods on
the earth (Page 114).
(115)
Satellite : The celestial bodies that revolve around a planet
without independently revolving around the sun are called
satellites. Like planets, satellites rotate around their respective
axes. The Moon is the satellite of the earth. It does not have
an atmosphere. Its periods of rotation and revolution are both
of 27.3 days. Except for Mercury and Venus all other planets
have satellites but in varying numbers.
Satellite
Asteroid : A great number of small Dwarf planet : A small sized celestial
sized bodies could not turn into planets body that revolves independently around
when the solar system was formed, but
| the sun is called a dwarf planet. A celestial
continued to revolve around the sun.
body like Pluto can
These bodies are
be classified as a
dwarf planet. Pluto
known as asteroids.
takes around 248
A belt of such
years to complete
celestial bodies has
its revolution around
formed between the
the sun whereas it
planets Mars and
Asteroid
takes around 6.38
Dwarf planet
Jupiter.
days for one rotation.
ST Use your brain power! |
Find out.
1. Why do we see only one side of
the moon?
2. Which planet has a day longer
than its year?
Obtain information about the various
asteroids and dwarf planets in the solar
system and discuss it in the class.
Can you tell ? Have you ever seen in the evening or in the predawn hours
a large celestial body with a long tail? What is it called?
A comet
A comet is a celestial body that revolves around the
sun. Comets are formed out of ice and dust particles.
Comets are classified
They are part of the solar system. Since olden times,
in two main groups.
the appearance of a comet has been considered to be an
inauspicious event. Comets appear like points when they
Long period comets :
are far away from the sun. But when they are close to These comets take
the sun, they become easily visible to us because of the more than 200 years to
shorter distance and the heat of the sun.
complete one revolution
Comets are made up of frozen matter and dust around the sun.
particles. When they are close to the sun, this frozen Short period comets:
matter gets converted into gas due to the solar heat.
These comets take
These gases get thrown in a direction away from the
sun. As a result, certain comets appear to have a long
less than 200 years to
feathery tail. Due to their long elliptical orbits, their
complete one revolution
appearance in the sky is very rare. They reappear in
around the sun.
the sky after very long periods of time.
(116
Do you know this?
)
Halley’s comet appeared in the year
1910 and reappeared in 1986. Its central
part or nucleus was found to be 16 km
long and 7.5 km wide. Halley’s comet
takes 76 years to complete its revolution
around the sun.
Halley's comet
A bit of fun!
Material required – a table fan, a bangle, a piece of light
cloth, twinned string and thread.
As shown in the picture,
sew the cloth around the
bangle. Take a string as
long as the length of the
cloth and tie it to the
bangle. Now hold the
bangle in front of the fan
and put on the fan.
In the past ...
Fred Whipple, an
American astronomer,
proposed that comets
consist of an icy cluster
of various constituents.
That is why, comets
came to be called 'dirty
snowballs'. By 1950,
Whipple had discovered
six comets.
A meteor
At times, we see a falling star. This event is called a meteor fall. Mostly these
meteors are rocky pieces originating from the asteroid belt. Smaller rocky pieces get
completely burnt due to friction with air after they enter the earth's atmosphere.
Sometimes the meteors do not burn completely and fall to the surface of the earth. These
are called meteorites. It is believed that the Lonar lake in Maharashtra has been formed
by the impact of such a meteorite. Meteors or meteorite falls occur on other celestial
bodies, too.
117
Always remember...
What we have learnt-
Science tries to explain
different events occurring
in the universe. We should
study phenomena like meteor
falls, eclipses, etc. rather
then attach any blind faith or
superstition with them.
• There are innumerable galaxies in the universe. Our solar
system, various star clusters are part of the Milky Way.
Various types of stars like the sun can be seen in
the Milky Way.
Different planets in the solar system have peculiar
characteristics. Some planets have satellites whereas
others do not have any.
Comets have a characteristic structure but their
appearance keeps on changing.
Exercise
1. Name these -
(a) Birth place of stars
(b) Biggest planet in the solar system
(c) The galaxy which is our neighbour.
(d) Brightest planet in the solar system
(e) Planet with largest number of
satellites
(f) Planets without a single satellite
(g) Planet with a rotation different
from other planets.
(h) A celestial body that carries a tail
along.
2. Fill in the blanks.
(a) The group of galaxies of which our
Milky Way is a part is called
4. Answer the following.
(a) What is a special characteristic of
the planet Mars ?
(b) What are the types of galaxies ?
(c) Which celestial bodies does a
galaxy include ?
(d) Name the different types of stars.
(e) What are the types of comets and
on what basis are they classified ?
(f) What is the difference between
meteors and meteorites ?
(g) What are the characteristics of the
planet Neptune ?
5. Match the following.
Group A Group B
(1) Galaxy (a) From east to west
(2) Comet (b) 33 satellites
(3) Sun-like star (c) Spiral
(4) Saturn (d) Sirius
(5) Venus (e) Halley
(b) Comets are made of ....
(c) The planet ............. appears as if it
is rolling along its orbit.
(d) ............ is a stormy planet.
(e) The Pole Star is the best example
of a ............. type of star.
3. Say if the statements given below are
right or wrong. Rewrite the statements
after correcting them.
(a) Venus is the planet closest to the
sun.
(b) Mercury is called a stormy planet.
(c) Jupiter is the biggest planet.
(Activity:
• Using the material you can find in
your house, prepare a model of the
solar system.
Collect information about different
aspects of each planet such as its
distance from the sun, its diameter,
its volume, etc. and present it in a
science exhibition.
(118)
Glossary
amphibian - उभयचर
annual - aifec
appendicular skeleton - उपांग सांगाडा
aquatic - जलचर
asteroids - लघुग्रह
autotrophic - Laziyat
axial skeleton - अक्षीय सांगाडा
balanced diet - संतुलित आहार
ball and socket joint - उखळीचा सांधा
bar magnet - पट्टी चुंबक
biennial – fallocs
blood vessel – रक्तवाहिनी
boiling - उत्कलन
boiling point - उत्कलनांक
brittleness - ठिसूळपणा
cartilage - कूर्चा
cellular structure - पेशीमय रचना
chemical energy - रासायनिक ऊर्जा
circular motion - वर्तुळाकार गती
comet - धूमकेतू
complex machine - jarjata ja
compound leaf - संयुक्त पान
condensation – संघनन
conventional resource of energy - पारंपरिक
ऊर्जा साधन
deficiency diseases - अभावजन्य आजार
density - घनता
dermis - त्वचा
disaster - 34746
displacement - farken 47
ductility - तन्यता
elasticity - स्थितिस्थापकता
electric energy - fagga Soulf
electrical conductivity – विदयुतवाहकता
electrostatic force - Freifach facia ad
epidermis - बाह्यत्वचा
excretion - उत्सर्जन
fat, fatty subtance - FATTET YGref
fibrous – तंतुमय
first aid - प्रथमोपचार
fluidity – salleat
food adulteration - 3779740
force - बल
freezing point - गोठणांक (गोठणबिंद)
frictional force - घर्षण बल
fulcrum - टेकू
funnel - नसराळे
galaxy – दीर्घिका
gravitational force - गुरुत्वाकर्षण बल
groundwater - भूजल
hardness - कठीणपणा
heterotrophic - परपोषी
hinge joint - बिजागरीचा सांधा
horseshoe magnet - नालाकृती चुंबक
humus – कुथित मृदा
immovable joint - अचल सांधा
inclined plane - उतरण
inert gas - निष्क्रिय वायू
insectivorous - कीटकभक्षी
invertebrate - अपृष्ठवंशीय
joint - HİETT
kinetic energy - गतिज ऊर्जा
lever - तरफ
lifespan - आयुर्मान
linear motion - रेषीय गती
load - भार
lustre - acolch
magnetic field - चुंबकीय क्षेत्र
magnetic force - चुंबकीय बल
magnetic substance - चुंबकीय पदार्थ
magnetism - चुंबकत्व
malleability - वर्धनीयता
(119)
malnutrition – कुपोषण
mechanical energy - यांत्रिक ऊर्जा
melting - विलयन
melting point – विलयबिंदू
meteor - उल्का
meteorite – 3797
Milky Way, the - आकाशगंगा
minerals - खनिजे
motion – गती
movable joint - चल सांधा
multicellular - बहुपेशीय
natural substance - Auffah ygtef
nebula - तेजोमेघ
non-conventional energy resource-
_अपारंपरिक ऊर्जा साधन
nutrients – 479cdcra
oscillatory motion – 3ticifcia Ta
oviparous - अंडज
perennial - बहुवार्षिक
periodic motion - नियतकालिक गती
Pole Star - ध्रुव तारा
potential energy - Feelfast Gulf
prism - लोलक
propagation of sound - ध्वनिप्रसारण
proteins - प्रथिने
pulley - coyt
random motion - यादृच्छिक गती
reflection of light - प्रकाशाचे परावर्तन
reproduction - पुनरुत्पादन/प्रजनन
satellite - उपग्रह
sensory organ - ज्ञानेंद्रिय
shadow formation - छायानिर्मिती
simple machine - साधे यंत्र
Sirius - व्याध तारा
skeletal system - अस्थिसंस्था
skull – कवटी
solubility - fagiola
states of substances – पदार्थांच्या अवस्था
sterile - निर्जंतुक
sternum - उरोस्थि
sublimation – संप्लवन
sunstroke - उष्माघात
taproot - सोटमूळ
terrestrial – भूचर
thermal conductivity – zoudidlechal
transparency - पारदर्शकता
unicellular - एकपेशीय
uniform motion - एकसमान गती
universal solvent - affald faglalah
vacuum – निर्वात
variable star – रूपविकारी तारा
vertebral column - पाठीचा कणा
vertebrate - yoodsite
vibration - 0047
viviparous – जरायुज
vocal cord - ध्वनितंतू
volume - आकारमान
weathering – 37987
wedge - पाचर
worm - कृमी
(120)
சு
AURAT
Maharashtra State Bureau of Textbook Production and Curriculum Research, Pune.
राज्य पाठ्यपुस्तकात
पासक्रम संशोधनमा
पुस्तक निर्मिती
इंग्रजी सामान्य विज्ञान इयत्ता सहावी
₹ 51.00
